INNER ENGINEERING: A YOGI'S GUIDE TO JOY
by Sadhguru

============================================================

This is a work of nonfiction. Some names and identifying details have been changed.
Copyright © 2016 by Jaggi Vasudev
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Spiegel & Grau, an imprint of Random House, a division of Penguin Random House LLC,
New York.
SPIEGEL & GRAU and Design is registered trademark of Penguin Random House LLC.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Penguin UK, a Penguin Random House Company, for permission to reprint an excerpt
from SPEAKING OF SIVA, translated with an introduction by A. K. Ramanujan (Penguin Classics, 1973). Copyright © 1973
by A. K. Ramanujan. Reprinted by permission
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Names: Vasudev, Jaggi, Sadhguru, author.
Title: Inner engineering : a Yogi's guide to joy / Sadhguru.
Description: First Edition. | New York : Spiegel & Grau, 2016.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015048462 | ISBN 9780812997798 | ISBN 9780812997804 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Yoga. | Spiritual life.
Classification: LCC BL1238.54 .V37 2016 | DDC 204/.36 -- dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2015048462
ebook ISBN 9780812997804
randomhousebooks.com
spiegelandgrau.com
Book design by Dana Leigh Blanchette, adapted for ebook
Title-page art spread: Artwork from Isha Yoga Center, Coimbatore, India
Title-page and part-title ornament: © iStockphoto.com
Part-title art: © il67/Shutterstock
Cover design: Greg Mollica
Cover art: courtesy of Isha Yoga Center, Coimbatore, India
v4.1_r1
ep

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Epigraph
The Four-Letter Word
Part One
A Note to the Reader
When I Lost My Sense
The Way Out Is In
Design Your Destiny
No Boundary, No Burden
". . . And Now, Yoga"
Part Two
A Note to the Reader
Body
Mind
Energy
Joy
Glossary
Inner Engineering Online Program
About the Author

One man's "magic" is another man's engineering.
 -- ROBERT A. HEINLEIN

The Four-Letter Word
Once it happened…A customer walking into Shankaran Pillai's pharmacy saw a man outside
hugging a lamppost, his eyeballs rolling wildly.
When he walked in, he asked, "Who's that man? What's wrong with him?"
Shankaran Pillai replied, unperturbed, "Oh, that guy. He's one of my customers."
"But what's the matter with him?"
"He wanted something for a whooping cough. I gave him the appropriate medicine."
"What did you give him?"
"A box of laxatives. I made him take it right here."
"Laxatives for a whooping cough! Why on earth would you give him that?"
"Oh come on, you saw him. You think he dares to cough anymore?"
Shankaran Pillai's box of laxatives is emblematic of the type of solution being peddled all
over the world today for those in search of well-being. It is the fundamental reason the term
"guru" has become a four-letter word.
Unfortunately, we have forgotten the real meaning of the word. "Guru" literally means
"dispeller of darkness." The function of the guru, contrary to popular belief, is not to teach,
indoctrinate, or convert. The guru is here to throw light on dimensions beyond your sensory
perceptions and your psychological drama, dimensions that you are currently unable to
perceive. The guru is here, fundamentally, to throw light on the very nature of your existence.
There are many spurious and dangerously misleading teachings in vogue in our world
today. "Be in the moment" is one of them. The assumption is that you could be somewhere
else, if you wanted. How is that even possible? The present is the only place that you can be. If
you live, you live in this moment. If you die, you die in this moment. This moment is eternity.
How are you going to escape it, even if you try?
Right now your problem is that you suffer what happened ten years ago and you suffer
what may happen the day after tomorrow. Both are not living truths. They are simply a play of
your memory and imagination. Does this mean then that in order to find peace you must
annihilate your mind? Not at all. It simply means you need to take charge of it. Your mind
carries the enormous reserves of memory and the incredible possibilities of the imagination
that are the result of an evolutionary process of millions of years. If you can use it when you
want and put it aside when you don't, the mind can be a fantastic tool. To shun the past and
neglect the future is to trivialize this wonderful faculty. So "be in the moment" becomes a

crippling psychological restriction -- it denies our existential reality.
"Do only one thing at a time" has become another popular self-help slogan. Why would
you do only one thing when the mind is a phenomenal multidimensional machine, capable of
handling several levels of activity all at once? Instead of harnessing and learning to ride the
mind, why would you want to obliterate it? When you can know the heady joy of mental
action, why would you opt for a lobotomy, for voluntary cabbage-hood?
The other phrase that has hardened into cliché through overuse is "positive thinking."
When it is oversimplified and used as some quick-fix mantra, positive thinking becomes a
way of whitewashing or sugarcoating your reality. When you are unable to process real-time
information and control your psychological drama, you seize on "positive thinking" as a
tranquilizer. Initially, it might seem to imbue your life with new confidence and optimism. But
it is essentially limited. In the long term, if you deny or amputate one part of reality, it gives
you a lopsided perspective of life.
Then there is the time-honored business of exporting human well-being to the heavens and
claiming that the core of the universe is love. Love is a human possibility. If you need a
refresher course, you can take lessons from your dog. He is full of love! You don't have to
go to outer space to know love. All these puerile philosophies come from the assumption that
existence is human-centric. This single idea has robbed us of all sense and made us commit
some of the most inhuman and heinous crimes throughout history. These continue to
perpetuate themselves to this very day.
As a guru, I have no doctrine to teach, no philosophy to impart, no belief to propagate. And
that is because the only solution for all the ills that plague humanity is self-transformation.
Self-transformation is not incremental self-improvement. Self-transformation is achieved not
by morals or ethics or attitudinal or behavioral changes, but by experiencing the limitless
nature of who we are. Self-transformation means nothing of the old remains. It is a
dimensional shift in the way you perceive and experience life.
Knowing this is yoga. One who embodies this is a yogi. One who guides you in this
direction is a guru.
My aim in this book is to help make joy your constant companion. To make that happen,
this book offers you not a sermon, but a science; not a teaching, but a technology; not a
precept, but a path. It is now time to start exploring that science, working the technology,
walking the path.
On this journey, the guru is not the destination but the road map. The inner dimension is
uncharted terrain. If you are exploring terrain that is unfamiliar to you, isn't it better to have
signposts? You could find your own way, but who knows, it could take lifetimes. When you're
on unfamiliar terrain, it's just sensible to take directions. On one level, that is all a guru is -- a
live road map. GPS: Guru Pathfinding System!
And that's why there exists that infamous four-letter word.
Just to make things doubly easy for you, I thought I'd make it eight…

A Note to the Reader
There are many ways to approach a book of this kind. One way would be to plunge directly
into practice, to take a headlong dive into do-it-yourself mode. But then this book doesn't
claim to be a self-help manual. It has a strong practical orientation, but there's more to it than
that.
Another way would be to turn theoretical. But this book is not an exercise in scholarship
either. I have never read any of the yogic treatises in their entirety. I never had to. I come from
inner experience. It was only late in my life when I skimmed through some of Patanjali's Yoga
Sutras, those significant yogic texts, that I realized that I had a certain access to their inner
core. This is because I approach them experientially, rather than theoretically. To reduce a
sophisticated science, like yoga, to mere doctrine is just as tragic as turning it into a
cardiovascular workout.
And so, this book has finally been divided into two sections. The first maps the terrain; the
second offers you a way to navigate it.
What you are about to read in this section is not a display of academic expertise. Instead,
this section seeks to offer a series of fundamental insights -- insights that lay the foundation or
bedrock on which the architecture of the more practice-oriented second section is built.
These insights are not tenets or teachings. And they are most definitely not conclusions.
They are best seen as signposts on a journey that can be made by no one but you. They are
core perspectives that have emerged as a consequence of the state of heightened awareness
that has been mine since a life-transforming experience thirty-three years ago.
The section begins on an autobiographical note. This is so you know something about the
authorial company you will be keeping, should you choose to read the rest of the book! The
section then unfolds into an examination of certain basic ideas, exploring along the way some
commonly used (and misused) terms such as destiny, responsibility, well-being, and even
more fundamentally, yoga.
One of the chapters in this section closes with a sadhana. The word "sadhana" in Sanskrit
means a device or a tool. These tools for exploration offer a chance for you as a reader to put
the ideas discussed in those pages into action and see if the insights work for you. (These
sadhanas will recur much more frequently in Section Two.)
I am often told by people that I seem to be a "modern" guru. My response to that
observation is that I am neither modern nor ancient, neither new age nor old age. I am
contemporary, and that is how every guru has always been. Only scholars, pundits, and
theologians are capable of being ancient or modern. A philosophy or belief system can be old
or new. But gurus are always contemporary.
A guru, as I said earlier, is someone who dispels darkness, someone who opens the door

for you. If I promise to open a door for you tomorrow or I opened it for someone else
yesterday, it is of no relevance. Only if I open a door for you today is it of some value.
So, the truth is timeless, but the technology and the language are always contemporary. If
they weren't, they would deserve to be discarded. No tradition, however time-honored,
deserves to live on as anything more than a museum piece if it has outlived its relevance. So,
while I will be exploring an ancient technology in this book, it is also a technology that is
flawlessly state-of-the-art.
Personally, I am not interested in offering anything new. I am only interested in what is true.
But I hope that the following section will offer you some moments when the two converge.
For at those junctures when the conditions are right -- when an insight is articulated from a
place of inner clarity and when it meets a reader at the right moment of receptivity, an age-old
truth turns explosively alchemical. All of a sudden, it is fresh, alive, radiantly new, as if
uttered and heard for the very first time in history.

Then I was a man
I only went up the Hill
As I had time to kill
But kill I did all that was
Me and Mine
With Me and Mine gone
Lost all my will and skill
Here I am, an empty vessel
Enslaved to the Divine Will
and infinite skill
In the city of Mysore, there is a tradition. If you have something to do, you go up Chamundi
Hill. And if you have nothing to do, you go up Chamundi Hill. If you fall in love, you go up
Chamundi Hill. And if you fall out of love, you have to go up Chamundi Hill.
One afternoon, I had nothing to do, and I had recently fallen out of love, so I went up
Chamundi Hill.
I parked my motorcycle and sat on an outcrop of rock about two-thirds of the way uphill.
This was my "contemplation rock." It had been for some time now. A purple berry tree and a
stunted banyan had put down tenacious roots into a deep fissure in the rock surface. A
panoramic view of the city unfolded before me.
Until that moment, in my experience, my body and mind was "me" and the world was "out
there." But suddenly I did not know what was me and what was not me. My eyes were still
open. But the air that I was breathing, the rock on which I was sitting, the very atmosphere
around, everything had become me. I was everything that was. I was conscious, but I had lost
my senses. The discriminatory nature of the senses simply did not exist anymore. The more I
say, the crazier it will sound because what was happening was indescribable. What was me
was literally everywhere. Everything was exploding beyond defined boundaries; everything
was exploding into everything else. It was a dimensionless unity of absolute perfection.
My life is just that moment, gracefully enduring.

When I returned to my normal senses, it felt as if just ten minutes had elapsed. But a glance
at my watch told me that it was seven thirty in the evening! Four and a half hours had passed.
My eyes were open, the sun had set, and it was dark. I was fully aware, but what I had
considered to be myself until that moment had completely disappeared.
I have never been the teary kind. And yet, here I was, at the age of twenty-five, on a rock on
Chamundi Hill, so ecstatically crazy that the tears were flowing and my entire shirt was wet!
Being peaceful and happy had never been an issue for me. I had lived my life the way I
wanted. I had grown up in the sixties, the era of the Beatles and blue jeans, read my share of
European philosophy and literature -- Dostoyevsky, Camus, Kafka, and the like. But here I was
exploding into a completely different dimension of existence of which I knew nothing,
drenched in a completely new feeling -- an exuberance, a blissfulness -- that I had never known
or imagined possible. When I applied my skeptical mind to this, the only thing my mind could
tell me was that maybe I was going off my rocker! Still, it was so beautiful that I knew that I
didn't want to lose it.
I have never quite been able to describe what happened that afternoon. Perhaps the best way
to put it is that I went up and didn't come down. I never have.
I was born in Mysore, a pretty princely town in southern India, an erstwhile capital, known for
its palaces and gardens. My father was a physician, my mother a homemaker. I was the
youngest of four siblings.
School bored me. I found sitting through class impossible because I could see that the
teachers were talking about something that did not mean anything to their lives. Every day, as
a four-year-old, I instructed my housekeeper, who accompanied me to school in the morning,
to drop me off at the gates and not enter the building. As soon as she left, I would dart to the
nearby canyon, which exploded with an incredible variety of life. I started accumulating a vast
personal zoo of insects, tadpoles, and snakes in bottles obtained from my father's medicine
cabinet. After a few months, when my parents discovered that I hadn't been attending school,
however, they seemed singularly unimpressed by my biological explorations. My expeditions
to the canyon were dismissed as messing about in a rainwater drain. Thwarted, as I often was,
by what I regarded as a dull and unimaginative adult world, I simply turned my attention
elsewhere and found something else to do.
In later years, I preferred to spend my days roaming the forest, catching snakes, fishing,
trekking, and climbing trees. I would often climb to the topmost branch of a big tree, with my
lunch box and water bottle. The swaying motion of the branches would transport me to a
trancelike state, where I was asleep but wide awake at the same time. I would lose all sense of
time on this tree. I would be perched there from nine o'clock in the morning to four thirty in
the evening when the bell rang and school was done. Much later, I realized that unknowingly I
was becoming meditative at this stage in my life. Later, when I first instructed people into

meditations, it was always swaying meditations. Of course, I hadn't even heard of the word
"meditation" at this point. I simply liked the way the tree swayed me into a state beyond sleep
and wakefulness.
I found the classroom dull but I was interested in everything else -- the way the world is
made, the physical terrain of the land, the way people live. I used to take my bicycle along the
mud roads in the countryside, riding a minimum of thirty-five kilometers a day. By the time I
came home, I'd be caked with layers of mud and dust. I particularly enjoyed making mental
maps of the terrain I'd traveled. I could just close my eyes when I was alone and re-draw the
entire landscape that I'd seen that afternoon -- every single rock, every outcrop, every single
tree. I was fascinated by the different seasons, the way the land changes when it is ploughed,
when the crops start germinating. That is what drew me to the work of Thomas Hardy: his
descriptions of the English landscape which go on for pages on end. I was doing the same in
my head with the world around me. Even today it is like a video in my head. If I want I can
replay the whole thing, those years and years of all that I observed, with vivid clarity.
I was a diehard skeptic. Even at the age of five, when my family went to the temple, I had
questions -- lots of them. Who is God? Where is He? Up there? Where is up? A couple of
years later, I had even more questions. In school, they said the planet was round. But if the
planet was round, how did one know which way was up? No one ever managed to answer
these questions, so I never entered the temple. This meant they were compelled to leave me in
the custody of the footwear attendant outside. The attendant held me by the arm in a viselike
grip, pulling and tugging me around with him as he did his business. He knew that if he
looked the other way I'd be gone! Later in my life, I couldn't help noticing that people
coming out of restaurants always had more joyful faces than those coming out of temples.
That intrigued me.
And yet, while I was a skeptic, I never identified with that label either. I had lots of questions
about everything, but never felt the need to draw any conclusions. I realized very early that I
knew nothing about anything. That meant I ended up paying enormous attention to everything
around me. If someone gave me a glass of water, I stared at it endlessly. If I picked up a leaf, I
stared at it endlessly too. I stared at the darkness all night. If I looked at a pebble, the image
would rotate interminably in my mind, so I would know its every grain, its every angle.
I also saw that language was no more than a conspiracy devised by human beings. If
someone spoke, I realized they were only making sounds, and I was making up the meanings.
So, I stopped making up meanings and the sounds became very amusing. I could see patterns
spewing out of their mouths. If I kept staring, the person would just disintegrate and turn into
a blob of energy. Then all that was left was patterns!
In this state of absolute borderless ignorance, just about anything could hold my attention.
My dear father, being a physician, began to think I needed psychiatric evaluation. In his words,
"This boy is staring unblinkingly at something all the time. He's lost it!" It has always seemed
to me odd that the world does not realize the immensity of a state of "I do not know." Those
who destroy that state with beliefs and assumptions completely miss an enormous possibility
 -- the possibility of knowing. They forget that "I do not know" is the doorway -- the only

doorway -- to seeking and knowing.
My mother instructed me to pay attention to my teachers. And I did. I paid them the kind of
attention they would never have received anywhere else! I had no idea what they were saying,
but on those occasions when I attended class, I stared at them, unwavering and intense. For
some reason, they did not find this trait particularly endearing. One particular teacher did
everything possible to elicit a response from me. But when I remained silent and taciturn, he
seized me by the shoulder and shook me violently. "Either you're the divine or the devil," he
declared. He added, "And I think you're the latter!"
I was not particularly insulted. Until that moment, I had approached everything around me
 -- from a grain of sand to the universe -- with a sense of wonder. But there had always been
one certainty in this complex web of questions and that was "me." But my teacher's outburst
triggered another line of inquiry. Who was I? Human, divine, devil, what? I tried to stare at
myself to find out. It didn't work. So, I closed my eyes and tried to find out. Minutes turned to
hours, and I continued to sit, eyes closed.
When my eyes were open, everything intrigued me -- an ant, a leaf, clouds, flowers,
darkness, just about anything. But to my amazement, I found that with my eyes closed, there
was even more that grabbed my attention -- the way the body pulses, the way different organs
function, the various channels along which one's inner energy moves, the manner in which
the anatomy is aligned, the fact that boundaries are limited to the external world. This exercise
opened up the entire mechanics of being human before me. Instead of leading me to a
simplistic answer that I was "this" or "that," it gradually brought me to a realization that, if I
were willing, I could be everything. It wasn't about arriving at any conclusions. Even the
certainty of "me" collapsed as a deeper sense of what it is to be a human being started opening
up. From knowing myself as an autonomous person, this exercise melted me down. I became
a nebulous being.
Despite all my wild ways, the one thing I did manage to do in a strangely disciplined
fashion was my practice of yoga. It started one summer vacation when I was twelve. A whole
bunch of us cousins met every year in my grandfather's ancestral home. In the backyard there
stood an old well, over 150 feet deep. While the girls played hide-and-seek, the regular game
played by us boys was to jump into the well and then climb up again. Both jumping down and
climbing up were a challenge. If you didn't do it properly, your brains could become a smear
on the wall. While you were climbing up, there were no steps; you simply had to clutch at the
rock surface and claw yourself up. Your fingernails often bled out of sheer pressure. Just a
few of the boys could do this. I was one of them and I was pretty good at it.
One day a man of over seventy years of age appeared. He watched us for a while. Without a
word, he jumped into the well. We thought he was finished. But he climbed out quicker than
me. I cast aside my pride and asked him just one question: How? "Come, learn yoga," said the
old man.
I followed him like a puppy. And that's how I became a student of Malladihalli Swami (as
this old man was known) and got into yoga. In the past, waking me up every morning was a
family project. My family would try to make me sit up in bed; I would keel over and fall

asleep again. My mother would hand me my toothbrush; I would stick it into my mouth and
fall asleep. In desperation, she would push me into the bathroom; I would promptly fall asleep
again. But three months after starting yoga, my body started coming awake at three forty
every morning, without any external prompting, as it does even today. After I woke, my
practices would simply happen, no matter where I was and in what situation, without a single
day's break. This simple yoga -- called angamardana (a system of physical yoga that
strengthens sinews and limbs) -- definitely set me apart in any group of people, physically and
mentally. But that's about all. Or so I believed.
In time, I lost all faith in structured education. It wasn't cynicism. I had enough zest and life
in me to keep me involved in everything. But my dominant quality even at this age was clarity.
I was not actively looking for inconsistencies or loopholes in anything I was taught. I just saw
them. I have never looked for anything in my life. I just look. And that is what I am trying to
teach people now: if you really want to know spirituality, don't look for anything. People
think spirituality is about looking for God or truth or the ultimate. The problem is you have
already defined what you are looking for. It is not the object of your search that is important;
it is the faculty of looking. The ability to simply look without motive is missing in the world
today. Everybody is a psychological creature, wanting to assign meaning to everything.
Seeking is not about looking for something. It is about enhancing your perception, your very
faculty of seeing.
After high school, I embarked on a self-study program at the Mysore University Library. I
was the first person there in the morning at nine and the last to be shooed out at eight thirty at
night. Between breakfast and dinner, my only sustenance was books. Although I was always
ravenous, I skipped lunch for a whole year. I read widely, from Homer to Popular Mechanics,
Kafka to Kalidasa, Dante to Dennis the Menace. I emerged from that one year more
knowledgeable, but with more questions than ever before.
My mother's tears compelled me to enroll grudgingly in Mysore University as a student of
English literature. But I continued to carry the cloud of a billion questions, like a dark halo
around me, all the time. Neither the library nor my professors could dispel it. Once again I
spent most of my time outside the classroom rather than in it. I found that all that was
happening in class was the dictation of notes, and I was definitely not planning to be a
stenographer! I once asked a lecturer to give me her notes so I could photocopy them; it
would save her the trouble of dictation and me the trouble of attending. Finally, I made a deal
with all the teachers (who were more than happy not to have me in class). On each day of the
month, they would mark me present in class. On the last day of the month the attendance was
registered. That day I would enter and just make sure they were keeping up their end of the
bargain!
A group of us started meeting under a huge banyan tree on the campus grounds. Someone
named it the Banyan Tree Club and the label stuck. The club had a motto: "We do it for the fun
of it." We would assemble under the tree on our motorcycles, and talk for hours on a variety
of subjects -- from how to make Jawa motorcycles go faster than they did to how to make the
world a better place. Of course, we would never get off our motorcycles at any point. That
would have been sacrilege!

By the time I was done with university, I had ridden all over the country. Initially, I traveled
South India on my bicycle. Later I crisscrossed the entire country on my motorcycle. Then it
was natural to cross the national borders. But when I reached the India-Nepal frontier, I was
told that my motorcycle registration and driving license weren't enough. I needed more
papers. After that, it became my dream to somehow earn enough money to travel the world on
my motorcycle. It wasn't just wanderlust. The truth is I was restless. I wanted to know
something. I didn't know what and I didn't know where I needed to go to get it. But in my
innermost being, I knew I wanted more.
I never considered myself particularly impulsive; I was just life-oriented. I measured the
consequences of my actions; it is just that the more dangerous they were, the more they
attracted me. Someone once told me my guardian angel must be very good and perpetually
working overtime! There was always in me a longing to test the border, to cross the edge.
What and why were never questions for me. How was the only question. When I look back
now, I realize that I never thought about what I wanted to become in life. I only thought about
how I wanted to live my life. And I knew that the "how" could only be determined within me
and by me.
There was a big boom in poultry farming at the time. I wanted to make some money to
finance my desire for unrestrained, purposeless travel. So I got into it. My father said, "What
am I going to tell people? That my son is rearing chickens?" But I built my poultry farm and I
built it single-handedly, from scratch. The business took off. The profits started rolling in. I
devoted four hours every morning to the business. The rest of the day was spent reading and
writing poetry, swimming in the well, meditating, daydreaming on a huge banyan tree.
Success made me adventurous. My father was always lamenting that everyone else's sons
had become engineers, industrialists, joined the civil service, or gone to America. And
everywhere everyone I met -- my friends, relatives, my old school and college teachers -- said,
"Oh, we thought you'd make something of your life, but you are just wasting it."
I took on the challenge. In partnership with a civil engineer friend, I entered the
construction business. In five years, we became a major construction company, among the
leading private contractors in Mysore. My father was incredulous and delighted.
I was exuberant and sure-footed, adrenaline-charged and itching for a challenge. When
everything you do is a success, you tend to start believing that the planets revolve around you,
not the sun!
And that was the kind of young man I was that fateful afternoon of September 1982 when I
decided to get on my Czech motorcycle and ride up Chamundi Hill.
I had no clue then that my life would never be the same again.
Later, when I tried to talk to my friends about what had happened that day up on the mountain,
all they could ask was, "Did you drink something? Did you pop something?" They were even

more clueless than I was of this new dimension that had suddenly exploded into my life.
Even before I had begun to process what it meant, the experience returned. It was a week
later. I was sitting at the dinner table with my family. I thought it lasted two minutes but it was
seven hours. I was sitting right there, fully aware, except that the "me" I knew as myself was
not there anymore; everything else was. And time flipped.
I remember various members of my family tapping me on the shoulder, asking me what
happened, urging me to eat my meal. I simply raised my hand and asked them to leave. They
were accustomed to my strange ways by then. They left me alone. It was almost four fifteen in
the morning when I returned to my "normal" senses.
The experience began to happen more frequently. When it occurred, I neither ate nor slept
for hours on end. I simply sat rooted to a single spot. On one occasion, the experience lasted
for up to thirteen days. I happened to be in a village when it began -- this state of
overwhelming and indescribable stillness and ecstasy. The villagers gathered around me and
started whispering to each other, "Oh, he must be in samadhi" (a blissful state of being beyond
the body, well-documented in Indian spiritual traditions). India, being the country it is, there
was a traditional understanding of spirituality to which they were heir that I, with my blue
denim - wrapped brain, had no clue about. When I emerged from that state, someone wanted to
put a garland around me. Another wanted to touch my feet. It was crazy; I could not believe
anyone would want to do this to me.
On another day, I was having lunch. I put a morsel of food in my mouth, and suddenly, it
exploded. At that moment, I was able to experience the miraculous alchemy of human
digestion -- the process by which an external substance, a piece of the planet, was becoming a
part of me. We all know this intellectually -- that a part of the planet nourishes us, and our
bodies, in turn, one day return to nourish the very same earth that once sustained us. But when
the knowledge dawned experientially, it altered my fundamental perspective of who I was. My
relationship with everything around me, including the planet, went through a dimensional
shift.
I grew aware of that extraordinary intelligence within each of us that is capable of
transforming a piece of bread or an apple into the human body in a single afternoon. Not a
small feat! As I began consciously touching that intelligence, which is the source of creation,
seemingly inexplicable events started occurring around me. Things that I touched were
transformed in some way or the other. People would look at me and burst into tears. Many
claimed that they were relieved of conditions of physical and mental suffering just by looking
at me. I found myself healed in a matter of hours of conditions that would have taken me
months to get out of through normal medical care. However, I gave all of this little
importance.
This ability to transform my external and internal reality quite dramatically has continued
within me and around me to this very day. It is not something I have ever tried consciously to
achieve. It is just that once one is in touch with this deeper dimension of intelligence, which is
the very basis of our existence here, life turns quite naturally miraculous.
In about six to eight weeks, this incredible experience became a living reality. During this

time, everything about me changed dramatically. My physical appearance -- the shape of my
eyes, my gait, my voice, the very alignment of my body -- began changing so drastically that
people around me started to notice as well.
What was happening inside me was even more phenomenal. Within six weeks, a huge flood
of memory descended -- literally, lifetimes of memory. I was now aware of a million different
things happening inside me in a single moment. It was like a kaleidoscope. My logical mind
told me none of this could be true. What I was seeing inside myself was clearer than daylight.
But I secretly hoped it was false. I had always seen myself as a smart young man. Suddenly I
appeared to be a clueless young fool, and that bewilderment was something I could not come
to terms with. But I found to my chagrin that everything my memory was telling me was true.
Until this time, I had completely refused to accept anything in my life that did not fit into a
rational and logical framework. Slowly, I began to realize that it is life that is the ultimate
intelligence. Human intellect is mere smartness that ensures survival. But true intelligence is
just life and life -- and that which is the source of life. Nothing else.
The world has been told that the divine is love, that the divine is compassion. But if you pay
attention to creation, you realize that the divine, or whatever is the source of creation, is,
above all, the highest intelligence that you can imagine. Instead of trying to tap into this all-
powerful intelligence that pulsates within each of us, we opt to use our logical intellect, which
is useful in certain situations, but essentially limited.
I also began to experience a heightened sensitivity to the feelings of others. Sometimes just
the sight of an unknown person on the street in a state of grief could make me weep. I could
not believe the states of misery that human beings were capable of enduring when here I was,
simply bursting with ecstasy for no reason at all.
It took a while for me to realize that what was happening to me was something "spiritual." I
began to understand that what the sacred traditions and scriptures had extolled as the ultimate
experience was happening to me; that I was experiencing, in fact, the most beautiful thing that
can happen to a human being.
Moment to moment every cell in my body was exploding with nameless ecstasies. Right
now people glorify childhood because a child can laugh and be happy for no reason at all. But
I saw that it is possible to be ecstatic in one's adulthood as well. It is possible for every human
being because all we can ever experience happens from within us.
I began to realize that the physical transformation in my appearance was actually a
realignment of my entire inner constitution. I had been practicing a basic set of physical
postures, or hatha yoga, since I was twelve years old. Those thirteen-odd years of yoga bore
fruit at this time. Yoga is essentially a way of re-creating the body so that it serves a higher
purpose. The human body can function as a piece of flesh and blood or as the very source of
creation.
There is a whole technology for transforming the human into the divine. The human spine
isn't just a bad arrangement of bones; it is the very axis of the universe. It just depends on how
you reorganize your system. In my case, from being a physically intense person, I learnt to
carry my body as if it were not there at all. My physicality became very relaxed. Earlier, all

that intensity was in my body. People could feel that if I entered a room, it meant action. But
now I learned to carry my body differently.
And that is when I realized that this experience I had had was really yoga. This experience
of union with existence, of oneness with all life, of boundlessness was yoga. The simple set of
yogic postures, or asanas, I'd been practicing daily was about physical fitness, or so I
thought. But after that experience on Chamundi Hill, I realized that what I was doing was
actually a process that could deliver me to a dimension far beyond the physical. And that is
why I tell people: even if you get into yoga for the wrong reasons, it still works!
There is something within every human being that dislikes boundaries, that is longing to
become boundless. Human nature is such that we always yearn to be something more than
what we are right now. No matter how much we achieve, we still want to be something more.
If we just looked at this closely, we would realize that this longing is not for more; this
longing is for all. We are all seeking to become infinite. The only problem is that we are
seeking it in installments.
Imagine that you were locked up in a cubicle of five feet by five feet. However comfortable
it is, you would long to be free of it. The next day, if you were released into a larger cubicle
of ten feet by ten feet, you would feel great for a while, but soon the same longing to break
that boundary would return. It does not matter how large a boundary we set, the moment you
become conscious of it, the longing to break it is instinctive. In the East, this longing has been
culturally recognized as the highest goal of all human activity and endeavor. Freedom -- or
mukti or moksha -- is seen as the natural longing in every human being and our ultimate
destination. It is just because we are unconscious of it that we seek to fulfill it in installments,
whether through the acquisition of power, money, love, or knowledge. Or through that other
great pastime of today -- shopping!
The moment I realized that human desire was not for any particular thing, but just to expand
illimitably, a certain clarity rose within me. When I saw that everyone is capable of this, it felt
natural to want to share it. My whole aim since then has been to somehow rub this experience
off on other people, to awaken them to the fact that this state of joy, of freedom, of
limitlessness cannot be denied to them unless they stand in the way of the natural
effervescence of life.
This condition of ecstatic well-being that has been mine since that afternoon on Chamundi
Hill is neither a distant possibility nor a pipe dream. It is a living reality for those who are
willing. It is the birthright of every human being.

Everything you have done in your life so far has been in pursuit of a single thing. Whether
you sought a career, started a business, made money, or built a family, it was always because
you wanted just one simple thing: joy.
But somewhere along the way, life got complicated.
If you had been born as any other creature on this planet, it would have been very simple.
Your needs would have just been physical. A full stomach would have been equivalent to a
great day. Take a look at your dog or your cat: the moment their stomach is full, they are quite
peaceful.
But when you come into this world as a human being, things change. An empty stomach is
one problem: hunger. But a full stomach? A hundred problems! When our survival is in
question, it is a big issue in our lives. But the moment it is taken care of, it doesn't seem to
mean anything. Somehow, for a human being, life doesn't seem to end with survival; life
begins with survival.
Today, as a generation of people, our survival process is better organized than ever before.
You can go to a supermarket and buy everything you need for the entire year. You can do it
without even stepping out of your home! Never before in the history of humanity has such a
thing been possible. Things that even royalty could not afford a hundred years ago are
accessible to the average citizen. We are the most comfortable generation to have ever lived
on this planet. The rub is that we are definitely not the most joyful, or the most loving, or the
most peaceful.
Why is this so? We have tried our best to fix the outside environment. If we fix it any more,
there will be no planet left! But we are still no happier than our ancestors a thousand years
ago. If it is not working, isn't it time to look at what's wrong? How can we continue to do
something that has not worked for a thousand years? How much longer are we going to live
with blueprints that clearly haven't delivered their promise?
It is time for a paradigm shift.
Let us start with a single question: what do we consider to be a state of well-being?

Very simply, well-being is just a deep sense of pleasantness within. If your body feels
pleasant, we call this health. If it becomes very pleasant, we call this pleasure. If your mind
becomes pleasant, we call this peace. If it becomes very pleasant, we call this joy. If your
emotions become pleasant, we call this love. If they become very pleasant, we call this
compassion. If your life energies become pleasant, we call this bliss. If they become very
pleasant, we call this ecstasy. This is all that you are seeking: pleasantness within and without.
When pleasantness is within, it is termed peace, joy, happiness. When your surroundings
become pleasant, it gets branded success. If you're not interested in any of this and want to go
to heaven, what are you seeking? Just otherworldly success! So, essentially all human
experience is only a question of pleasantness and unpleasantness in varying degrees.
But how many times in your life have you lived an entire day blissfully -- without a single
moment of anxiety, agitation, irritation, or stress? How many times have you lived in utter
and absolute pleasantness for twenty-four hours? When was the last time it happened to you?
The amazing thing is that for most people on this planet, not a single day has happened
exactly the way they want it! Of course, there is no one who has not experienced joy, peace,
even bliss, but it is always fleeting. They are unable to sustain it. They manage to get there, but
it keeps collapsing. And nothing earth-shattering needs to happen for it to collapse. The
simplest things throw people off balance, out of kilter.
It is like this. You go out today and someone tells you that you are the most beautiful person
in the world: you're floating on cloud nine. But then you come home, and the folks at home
tell you who you really are: everything crashes!
Sound familiar?
Why do you need to be pleasant within? The answer is self-evident. When you are in a
pleasant inner state, you are naturally pleasant to everyone and everything around you. No
scripture or philosophy is needed to instruct you to be good to others. It is a natural outcome
when you are feeling good within yourself. Inner pleasantness is a surefire insurance for the
making of a peaceful society and a joyful world.
Besides, your success in the world depends essentially on how well you harness the
prowess of the body and mind. So, in order to achieve success, pleasantness has to be the
fundamental quality within you.
Above all, there is substantial medical and scientific evidence today that your body and
mind function at their best when you are in a pleasant state. It is said that if you can remain
blissful for twenty-four hours, your intellectual capabilities can be almost doubled. Just
settling the internal muddle and allowing clarity to surface can achieve this.
Now, the same life energy that you refer to as "myself" has sometimes been very happy,
sometimes miserable, sometimes peaceful, sometimes in turmoil. The same life energy is
capable of all those states. So, if you were given a choice about the kind of expression your
life energies should find, what would you choose? Joy or misery? Pleasantness or
unpleasantness?
The answer is self-evident. The ways may vary from person to person. But whether you're
trying to make money, hitting the bottle, or attempting to get to heaven, pleasantness is the

only goal. Even if you say you are not interested in this world and your mission in life is only
to get to heaven, you're still only searching for pleasantness. If people had told you since
your childhood that God lives in heaven, but heaven is a horrendous place, would you want to
go there? Definitely not! Essentially, the highest level of pleasantness is heaven;
unpleasantness is hell. So, some think it's in the wine, and others think it's in the divine, but
pleasantness is what everyone's seeking.
The only thing that stands between you and your well-being is a simple fact: you have
allowed your thoughts and emotions to take instruction from the outside rather than the inside.
On a certain day, a lady went to sleep. In her sleep, she had a dream. She saw a hunk of a
man, staring at her. Then he started coming closer -- closer and closer.
He was so close that she could even feel his breath.
She trembled -- not in fear.
Then she asked, "What will you do to me?"
The man said, "Well, lady, it's your dream!"
What's happening in your head is your dream. At least your dream should happen the way
you want it, shouldn't it? Even if the world doesn't happen the way you want it, at least your
thoughts and emotions should happen the way you want them to. Right now, these aren't
taking instructions from you because you are handling the whole human mechanism
accidentally.
The human mechanism is the most sophisticated physical form on the planet. You are the
greatest piece of technology, but the problem is you don't know where the keyboard is. It's
like you're handling a supercomputer with a pickaxe and a wrench! As a result, the simple life
process is taking a toll upon humanity. Just to earn a living, to reproduce, to raise a family,
and then one day to fall dead -- what a challenge! It is amazing how human beings struggle just
to do what every worm, insect, bird, and animal does quite effortlessly.
Put simply, our inner ecology is a mess. Somehow we think that fixing outer conditions
will make everything okay on the inside. But these past 150 years are proof that technology
will only bring comfort and convenience to us, not well-being. We need to understand that
unless we do the right things, the right things will not happen to us: this is true not just of the
outside world, but also the inside.
On a certain day, a bull and a pheasant were grazing on a field. The bull was grazing and the
pheasant was picking ticks off the bull -- a perfect partnership. Looking at the huge tree at the
edge of the field, the pheasant said, "Alas, there was a time I could fly to the topmost branch
of the tree. Now I do not have enough strength in my wing to even get to the first branch."
The bull said nonchalantly, "Just eat a little bit of my dung every day, and watch what
happens. Within two weeks, you'll get to the top."

The pheasant said, "Oh come on, that's rubbish. What kind of nonsense is that?"
The bull said, "Try it and see. The whole of humanity is onto it."
Very hesitantly, the pheasant started pecking. And lo, on the very first day, he reached the
first branch. Within a fortnight, he had reached the topmost branch. He sat there, just
beginning to enjoy the scenery.
The old farmer, rocking on his rocking chair, saw a fat old pheasant on top of the tree. He
pulled out his shotgun and shot the bird off the tree.
Moral of the story: bullshit may get you to the top, but it never lets you stay there!
So, you can bullshit yourself into all kinds of emotional states, you can somehow crank up
some well-being for yourself, but the problem is, it doesn't last. The weather could bring it
down. The stock market could make it come crashing down. And even if it does not collapse,
living in anticipation that it might is bad enough! The impending possibility that it will fall
apart one day is torture -- often worse than the actual disaster. So, as long as your inner life is
enslaved to external situations, it will remain a precarious condition. There is no other way
for it to be.
What then is the way out?
The way out is a very simple change in direction. You just need to see that the source and
basis of your experience is within you. Human experience may be stimulated or catalyzed by
external situations, but the source is within. Pain or pleasure, joy or misery, agony or ecstasy,
happens only inside you. Human folly is that people are always trying to extract joy from the
outside. You may use the outside as a stimulus or trigger, but the real thing always comes
from within.
Right now, you are holding a book. Where do you see the book? Use your finger and point
to where you see it. Do you think the image is outside you?
Think again.
You remember how it works? The light is falling upon the book, reflecting, going into the
lens of your eyes, and projected as an inverted image on your retina -- you know the whole
story. So, you are actually seeing the book within yourself.
Where do you see the whole world?
Again, within yourself.
Everything that ever happened to you, you experienced right within you. Light and
darkness, pain and pleasure, agony and ecstasy -- all of it happened within you. If someone
touches your hand right now, you may think you are experiencing their hand, but the fact of
the matter is you are only experiencing the sensations in your own hand. The whole
experience is contained within. All human experience is one hundred percent self-created.
If your thought and your emotion are of your making, you can mold them any way you
like. There is scientific proof today that without ingesting a drop of alcohol or any other
substance, you can get fully intoxicated by yourself. An Israeli organic chemist, Raphael
Mechoulam, and his research team initiated a project that eventually isolated a "bliss
molecule" in the human system. In lay terms, they discovered that the human brain has natural

cannabis receptors. Why is this so? They found that this is simply because the body is capable
of producing its own narcotic. It can manufacture its own bliss with no external stimulus -- and
that too, with no hangover! The reason why certain chemical substances, like alcohol and
recreational drugs, are dangerous is because they can reduce your awareness, ruin your
health, create addictions, and destroy you. But here is a bliss narcotic that is created and
consumed by your own system -- and which has a tremendous impact on health and well-
being! It means that the human system is wonderfully self-contained. Other similar chemicals
have been discovered more recently as well, but this particular chemical has been named
"anandamide," based on the Sanskrit word ananda, which means bliss. We can infer from this
that happiness is just a certain kind of chemistry. Peace is another kind of chemistry. In fact,
every kind of pleasantness that we experience -- whether peace or joy or ecstasy -- is a kind of
chemistry. The yogic system has always known this.
There is a technology for inner well-being -- for creating a chemical basis for a blissful
existence. This is one dimension of what I call "Inner Engineering." If you are aware, you can
activate your system in such a way that simply breathing is an enormous pleasure. All it takes
is a willingness to pay a little attention to the inner mechanism.
This is the fundamental shift in understanding that has to happen. Do not look for a way out
of misery. Do not look for a way out of suffering. There is only one way -- and that is in.
Most people think peace and joy are the goals of the spiritual life. This is a fallacy. Peace and
joy are the basic requirements for a life of well-being. If you want to enjoy your dinner
tonight, you must be peaceful and happy. If you want to enjoy your family, the work that you
do, the world that you live in, you must be peaceful and happy. Peace and joy are not things
you attain at the end of life. They are the basis of your life. If you consider peace to be the
ultimate goal, you will only "rest in peace"!
The word "spirituality" is one of the most corrupted words on the planet. Don't walk the
spiritual path for peace. It is because most people are so deprived of peace that they consider
it to be the ultimate aspiration. When I was in Tel Aviv some years ago, I was told that shalom
was the highest form of greeting possible. I asked why. "Because it means peace," I was told. I
said, "Why would peace be the highest aspiration unless you're in the Middle East?"
If you were on a desert island without food for ten days and suddenly God appeared before
you, would you want Him to appear as a shining light or in the form of bread? In India certain
communities worship food as God because they have been deprived of food for a long time.
In California, love is God! Whatever you feel deprived of looks like the highest aspiration.
The thing to remember is that none of these will settle you in any enduring way. Human life is
longing for unlimited expansion, and that is the only thing that will settle you for good.
The spiritual quest is not a cultivated choice. It is not an induced quest. It is a natural
longing. But unless you handle it consciously, it will not yield. When being peaceful, blissful,

and joyous are not efforts anymore, you naturally start seeking, want to know the nature of
life. Mysticism on this planet evolved only in those places where people learned the
technology of being ecstatic by their own nature. This is because only when you are blissful
will you be in the highest state of receptivity, and truly willing to explore all aspects of life.
Otherwise, you would not dare, because if keeping yourself pleasant is a big challenge, you
can't take on other challenges.
Once it happened…An eighty-five-year-old man went fishing in Louisiana. When he was
just about to call it a day, he caught a frog. He was about to release it into the marsh again,
when the frog spoke. "Just kiss me passionately," it said, "and I will turn into a beautiful
young woman."
The old man inspected the frog for a long time. The frog puckered up its lips in
anticipation. Then the old man put the frog into his fish bag.
The frog screamed, "Didn't you hear me? Just one kiss and I will turn into a really
beautiful young woman!"
The old man said, "At my age, there's not much I can do with a beautiful young woman. If
kissing you could turn me into a handsome young prince, that would be different. But for now
 -- a talking frog! Believe me, I can smell money!"
Choices that you make out of inability are not life solutions. An inability to be joyful by
your own nature can make the simplest issues in life seem like highly complex problems.
Right now being peaceful and joyful is made out to be the most significant problem in human
existence. In pursuit of human happiness, we are ripping the planet apart.
The reason the simple things -- like being peaceful, joyful, loving -- have become ultimate
aspirations is that people are living without paying any attention to the life process. When
most people say "life," they mean the accessories of life -- their work, their family, their
relationships, the homes they live in, the cars they drive, the clothes they wear, or the gods
they pray to. The one thing they miss is life -- the life process itself, the essential life that is
you. The moment you make this fundamental mistake of identifying something that is not you
as yourself, life becomes an unnecessary struggle. The foundations of peace and bliss are not
about attending to the external realities of your life, but in accessing and organizing the inner
nature of your being.
You are capable of experiencing only that which is within the boundaries of your sensation.
But if you throw the boundary of your sensation out in an expanded form, you can sit here
and experience everyone as yourself. You can stretch it further and experience the very
cosmos as you experience your own body.
When this sense of inclusiveness happened to me, I understood that being loving and
compassionate is not an idea. To live in empathy is not some esoteric principle. This is the
way a human being is made. If you do not identify with anything you have accumulated over a
period of time, including your body and mind, you will be able to experience this.
Enlightenment is not an attainment or an achievement. It is a homecoming. Your senses give
you the impression that you are experiencing the outside, but you have never experienced the
outside. When you realize that all that you experience is within, that absolute homecoming is

enlightenment.
My life is just devoted to evolving methods so that people can experience this inclusiveness.
If we truly have to create solutions that are relevant for all, an experience of absolute
inclusiveness has to happen to humanity. And it is possible.
The reason why everyone is not naturally enlightened is simply this: people have
categorized the world into good and bad, God and Devil, high and low, sacred and filthy, pure
and impure, heaven and hell. These are parallel lines that will never meet.
Once you have fractured this existence within yourself, there is no way to reach a state of
enduring well-being and freedom. You have been told to love your enemy. If you first label
someone your enemy and then try to love him or her, it's going to be torturous! Once you
have fragmented creation like this, there is no way to arrive at a state of absolute
inclusiveness.
The problem is that human beings have lost a fundamental distinction -- between inward and
outward, between their way of being and the way they transact with the external world.
Transactions are different, according to the nature of a situation or relationship. However
remote or intimate, transactions are always governed by laws or norms.
But when it comes to our inner nature, there is only one governing principle: borderless
unity. Our physical and social worlds are governed by boundaries. Our inner world needs
none. To attain the ecstasy of borderless unity, which is our natural state, all you need to do is
live by the guideline that all human experience is generated from within -- either with the
support of external stimuli or without. That is all. If you establish this within yourself
absolutely, the consequences of your transactions will no longer be burdensome.
What do we mean by this? People often ask me, "Maybe this is possible for you as a yogi,
but how can we who live in the 'real world' make our interactions free of friction?" I remind
them that I don't live in a cave. I also lead people. I am doing work around the world with
over one million volunteers. This means they usually aren't trained for the job they are doing
 -- and you can't fire them! Do you know how difficult it is to manage such a situation? By
implication, my life should be the most burdensome! But you won't ever see me distressed
because my way of being is not in any way enslaved to what's happening outside. This is not
an otherworldly achievement. It is possible for everyone to live this way.
If you still believe that someone "up there" is going to rescue you and solve all your
problems, just remember that you are living on a round planet -- and one that's spinning. So,
whenever you look up, you are obviously looking in the wrong direction! In this vast ever-
expanding cosmos, what's up and what's down? You have no clue. Nowhere in the cosmos is
it marked "This side up"! The only distinction you do know right now is "within" and
"without" (although, for the yogi, even this distinction has vanished).
Thousands of years ago, a yogi appeared in the upper reaches of the Himalayas. He came to
be known as Adiyogi, the first yogi. And it was he who bequeathed the science of yoga to
seven disciples, who later carried it around the world. What he imparted to these disciples was
an unimaginably profound system of self-exploration and transformation, based on the
radical premise that it is possible for a human being to evolve consciously. Unlike biological

evolution, which happens without our conscious participation, spiritual evolution can happen
consciously. All it takes, Adiyogi told us, is willingness.
If we were to distill the essence of his wisdom in a few lines, it would be just this. Up and
down, good and bad, sacred and profane: these are all assumed. But inward and outward: this
is the one context we are sure of, the one context we can work with. This is Adiyogi's most
significant contribution to humankind and it is a profound and enduring one: "The only way
out is in."
Once it happened…Someone came looking for the Isha Yoga Center in southern India.
They came to a nearby village and asked a local boy, "How far is the Isha Yoga Center?"
The boy scratched his head and said, "24,996 miles."
The man was aghast. "What? That far?"
The boy said, "Yes, the way you're going. But if you turn around, it's just four miles."
If you go outward, it is an endless journey. If you turn inward, it is just one moment.
In that one moment, everything changes. In that one moment, you are not in pursuit of joy
anymore. Instead, your life becomes an expression of your joyfulness.

I was once at an international conference on how to alleviate poverty on the planet. There
were several eminent participants in positions of public responsibility, including a generous
sprinkling of Nobel laureates.
At one point, a participant said, "Why are we trying to solve these problems? Isn't all this
divine will?"
And I said, "Yes, if somebody else is dying, somebody else is hungry, it must be divine will.
But if your stomach is empty, if your child is dying of hunger, you'll have your own plan,
won't you?"
Whenever we have had to do something about our lives, we have taken it into our hands.
Whenever it comes to other people's misfortunes, we have a word to explain it: destiny.
And what a convenient word that is. Destiny has become a popular scapegoat, a way to deal
with failure, a fatalistic ruse to reconcile ourselves to all kinds of uncomfortable situations.
But turning inward is the first step from passivity to agency -- from being a victim toward
becoming a master of your own destiny.
A variety of diseases that people believed to be "God's will" until a hundred years ago, are
in our hands today. This is because we have taken charge of certain situations. Polio is an
example. The very word "polio" would strike terror in the hearts of many in recent history.
When I was growing up, I saw quite a few polio-afflicted people about my age, in school and
in my neighborhood, who were doomed to live out their lives in wheelchairs. It was a
common sight, and it was an acknowledged fact that they would never be able to walk in their
lives. Their affliction was usually seen as an act of God or destiny.
At the start of the twentieth century, polio was the most feared ailment in industrialized
countries, irreversibly paralyzing thousands of children. Effective vaccines helped practically
eliminate this disease in the 1950s and '60s. When it was recognized as a major problem in
developing countries, immunization programs were introduced. In 1988, polio afflicted
350,000 children around the world in a single year; in 2013, the number had dropped to 416.
By 2012, India was no longer on the list of polio-endemic countries. A combination of
political advocacy, public and private partnerships, effective reasonably priced vaccines,
community participation, and teams of global healthcare workers, proved that despite all the
obstacles, even in a country as vast and challenging as India, eradication was possible.
To be human means you can mold situations you are living in the way you want them. But

today most people in the world are molded by the situations in which they exist. This is simply
because they live in reaction to situations they are placed in. The inevitable question is, "Why
was I placed in such a situation? Isn't it my destiny?" Whatever we do not want to take
responsibility for, whatever we cannot make sense of logically, we label "destiny." It is a
consoling word, but disempowering.
To mold situations the way you want them you must first know who you are. The crux of
the matter is that you don't yet know who you are. Who you are is not the sum total of
accumulations you have made. Everything that you currently know as "myself" is just an
accumulation. Your body is just an accumulation of food. Your mind is just an accumulation
of impressions gathered through the five senses. What you accumulate can be yours, but it can
never be you.
Who then are you? That is yet to come into your experience. That is still in an unconscious
state. You are trying to live your life through what you have gathered, not through who you
are. What's more, you are not even a hundred percent conscious of what you have gathered!
You have acquired certain tendencies over the years, depending on the impressions you
have accumulated. These can be transformed entirely. If you do a certain amount of inner
work, if you implement certain inner technologies -- irrespective of your current tendencies,
your past experience of life, your genetics, your environment -- you can completely rewire
yourself in a short span of time!
Everything in this existence is happening naturally according to a certain organic law. If
you know the nature of life within you, you can completely take charge of the way it happens,
but within the broad parameters set by the laws of nature. What do we mean by this? Let us
look at a concrete example. Although we are wingless creatures, we have still, in the last one
hundred years, managed to fly. How? Not by breaking the laws of nature, but through a deeper
understanding of the laws of nature. So, the technology we are going to explore in this book
is a small part of the much deeper science that eventually enables an adept to take the very
process of life and death into his or her hands.
Your destiny is written by you unconsciously. If you have mastery over your physical body,
fifteen to twenty percent of your life and destiny will be in your hands. If you have mastery
over your mind, fifty to sixty percent of your life and destiny will be in your hands. If you
have mastery over your life energies, a hundred percent of your life and destiny will be in
your hands.
Even now you are choosing your life, but you are choosing it in total unawareness. But
whatever you do in unawareness, you can also do in awareness. That makes a world of a
difference. It is the difference between ignorance and enlightenment.
Unpleasantness is happening to you, in the form of anger, fear, anxiety, and stress, because
your basic faculties -- your body, mind, and life energies -- are doing their own thing. When
mind and body exist only to serve the life within you, why is your life currently enslaved to
the mind and body? Isn't this a complete distortion of the way life should function?
Taking destiny into your hands doesn't mean everything will happen your way. The outside
world will never happen a hundred percent your way, because there are too many variables

involved. Wanting the outside to happen exactly the way you choose is the path of conquest,
tyranny, dictatorship.
Once it happened…Shankaran Pillai (a certain South Indian gentleman you met in the
introduction and will meet several times more in the course of this book) went drinking with
his buddies. He thought he would have a quick drink and go home at eight o'clock. And so he
did. He had a quick drink, and a quick drink, and another quick drink. And then one more
quick drink. He looked at his watch. It said two thirty. (Drink makes people like yogis -- 
timeless.) He got off the barstool. It is such an unfair world: a man is expected to walk on a
round planet that spins. With great skill and dexterity, he balanced himself and started making
his journey homeward.
Taking a shortcut through a park, he fell headlong into a rosebush. His face became a mess.
He gathered himself and started making his way again. In this condition, he reached home,
and tried to find the keyhole. But those wretched keyholes nowadays are made so small! That
took another twenty minutes.
He finally got in and stumbled into the bedroom. Fortunately, the wife was a big sleeper. He
went into the bathroom, looked at himself in the mirror. His face was a real mess. He opened
the medicine cabinet, took out some medicine and a box of Band-Aids and fixed himself,
whichever way he could. Then he crawled quietly into bed.
Next morning, his wife threw a bucket of cold water on his face.
He woke up gasping, feeling water-boarded. He said, "Why, why? It's only a Sunday!"
She said, "You fool! Once again drinking?"
"No, honey, I promised you six months ago. Since then, I haven't touched a drop."
She held him by the shirt, dragged him into the bathroom, and showed him: the Band-Aids
were all over the mirror!
When pain, misery, or anger happen, it is time to look within you, not around you. To
achieve well-being the only one who needs to be fixed is you. What you forget is that when
you are sick, it is you who needs the medication. When you are hungry, it is you who needs the
food. The only one that needs to be fixed is you, but just to understand this simple fact people
take lifetimes!
Creating your own destiny does not mean you have to control every situation in the world.
Creating your destiny is about steadily heading toward your well-being and your ultimate
nature, no matter what the content of life is around you. It simply means making yourself in
such a way that, whatever the events and situations around you, you don't get crushed by them;
you ride them.
The spiritual process is not about imposing your ideas on existence; it is about making
yourself in such a way that the creation and the Creator, and every atom in this existence,
cannot help yielding to you. When you pursue your own likes and dislikes, you feel alone in
this vast existence, constantly insecure, unstable, psychologically challenged. But once
existence yields to you, it delivers you to a different place of grace -- where every pebble,
every rock, every tree, every atom, speaks to you in a language you understand. Every

moment there are a million miracles happening around you: a flower blossoming, a bird
tweeting, a bee humming, a raindrop falling, a snowflake wafting along the clear evening air.
There is magic everywhere. If you learn how to live it, life is nothing short of a daily miracle.
It doesn't matter who you are, life doesn't work for you unless you do the right things. You
may consider yourself a good person, but if you don't water your garden, will it flower? You
need to do the right things if you want results. Judgments about good and bad are essentially
human and socially conditioned. These are fine as social norms. But existence is not
concerned with these conclusions. Existence is not judgmental. It treats all of us the same way.
One winter morning in Michigan, an old-timer went ice-fishing. It was ten o'clock in the
morning. He cut a small hole in the ice and sat down with a crate of beer beside him. Fishing
is not just about the catch; it is a patience game. He knew that. He put the line in. One by one,
the beer cans started emptying out. The fishing basket also stayed empty.
The day drew on. At four o'clock in the afternoon, his basket was still empty. So was his
crate of beer.
A young boy came along. He was carrying a big boom box that played deafening heavy
metal music. He cut a hole in the ice nearby, and sat down to fish, his music still blaring.
The old-timer glanced at him with ill-disguised contempt. "I've been sitting here since
morning quietly, with not a single fish, and the fool thinks he can catch fish with music
blaring, at four in the afternoon! No fool like a young fool!"
To his amazement, within ten minutes, the boy landed a huge trout! The old man dismissed
it as a lucky break and continued fishing. Ten minutes later the boy caught one more big trout.
Now the old man could ignore it no longer. He stared at the boy, dumbfounded. And just
then, to his utter disbelief, the boy landed one more huge trout.
The old-timer cast his pride aside and walked slowly over to the boy. "What is the secret?"
he asked. "I've been sitting here the whole day and my basket is empty. You already have three
huge trout. What's going on?"
The boy said, "Ru ra ra ra ru ra rum."
The old man put his hand to his ear and asked, "What?"
The boy turned down the stereo and said, "Ru ra ra ra ru ra rum."
The old man was perplexed. "I don't understand a word you're saying."
The boy spat a blob of something into his hand and said, "You have to keep the worms
warm."
Unless you do the right things, the right things will not happen to you. Principles and
philosophies are only of social consequence. It is time to wake up to yourself as an existential
being, a living being, rather than a psychological case. Then your destiny will be your own.
One hundred percent your own.

Once it happened…An argument arose one evening between a husband and wife. The
argument was over the burning question: who should close the front door today?
Not a simple question. And not a laughing matter. These are very serious issues in domestic
situations. Who should close the door today, who should switch off the garden lights this
evening, who should take the dog for a walk -- these are questions that can drive couples to
divorce.
The argument grew more and more heated. The wife decided, "Every day, it is I who in the
end accepts defeat. Today, I am not going to give in." The husband also grew equally
determined. "She pushes me around all the time. I am not going to give in to this woman
today, no matter what."
It was one of those grand rows. Now, every home has its own system of resolving these
arguments. In this family, when confronted by an impasse, both husband and wife would sit
silently; the person who uttered the first word would have to go and close the door.
The two sat in stony silence. Minutes ticked on into hours. Dinner was on the table. If the
husband said he wanted to eat, he would have to close the door. If the wife proposed dinner,
she would have to close the door.
Midnight. They were still sitting. A few rogues were passing by on the street. They saw the
doors of the house open, lights on, no party, nothing. Everything was quiet. They wanted to
see what was going on, so they looked into the sitting room. They saw two people sitting
there, steadfastly silent.
The rogues looked at the silent couple. They were a little surprised. They decided to take a
chance. They helped themselves to a few valuables in the sitting room. The two people said
nothing. The rogues grew amused. Emboldened, they sat at the dining table and served
themselves dinner. The couple sat heroically silent.
The rogues were hugely tickled. What the hell was happening here? They grew bolder still.
One of them kissed the wife. Still, the couple didn't utter a word. The one who spoke would
have to close the door. The stakes were too high. Neither could risk it.
Now the rogues got a bit spooked. They decided it was time to leave this strange household.
But before they left, they wanted to leave their mark. They decided to shave off the husband's
moustache. One of them approached him, razor in hand.

Then the husband finally spoke. He said, "Okay, damn it, I'll close the door!"
Perhaps the scenarios are different, but are there not situations in your life that hinge on a
similar question: who's responsible?
Who is responsible?
It's a big question. Let's put the question more precisely: who is responsible for the way
you are right now?
Your genes? Your father? Your mother? Your wife? Your husband? Your teacher? Your
boss? Your mother-in-law? God? The government? All of the above?
The condition is a pervasive one. Ask someone, "Why are you in this situation?" Pat comes
the response, "You know, when I was a child, my parents…" The same old story, with just a
few variations.
There is an ancient science of how to create misery, and one in which human beings need
no encouragement whatsoever. There is almost no one who is not an expert. Passing the buck
is what you do in a hundred different ways each day. You have collectively refined the old
blame game into a fine art.
The quality of our lives is determined by our ability to respond to the varied complex
situations that we encounter. If the ability to respond with intelligence, competence, and
sensitivity is compromised by a compulsive or reactive approach, we are enslaved by the
situation. It means we have allowed the nature of our life experience to be determined by our
circumstances, not by us.
Being fully responsible is to be fully conscious. What you consider to be your body is what
you have gathered through ingestion. What you consider to be your mind is what you have
gathered through the five senses. What is beyond that -- which you did not gather -- is who you
are. Being alive is being conscious. Everybody is conscious to some degree, but when you
touch the dimension beyond body and beyond mind, you have touched that which is the very
source of consciousness. You realize then that the entire universe is conscious. You inhabit a
living cosmos.
The physical and psychological dimensions belong to the realm of polarities -- pain-
pleasure, love-hate, masculine-feminine, and so on. If you have one, the other is bound to
follow. But when you move into the fundamental dimension of who you are, you are beyond
all polarities. You now become blissful by your own nature. You are the master of your own
destiny.
It is time to reclaim for ourselves the extraordinary transformative power of this single
word: responsibility. Apply it to your life, and watch the magic unfold.
Let us settle what we mean by the word, at the start. "Responsibility" is a much misunderstood
term. It has been used so widely and indiscriminately that it has lost much of its inner voltage.

Responsibility does not mean taking on the burdens of the world. It does not mean accepting
blame for things you have done or not done. It does not mean living in a state of perpetual
guilt.
Responsibility simply means your ability to respond. If you decide, "I am responsible," you
will have the ability to respond. If you decide, "I am not responsible," you will not have the
ability to respond. It is as simple as that. All it requires is for you to realize that you are
responsible for all that you are and all that you are not, all that may happen to you and all that
may not happen to you.
This is not a mind game. This is not a self-help strategy for easy living. This is not a
philosophical theory. This is a reality. Your physical existence is possible only because of
your body's seamless ability to respond to the entire universe. If your body wasn't
responding, you wouldn't be able to exist for a moment. Do you see that?
What the trees around you are exhaling, you are inhaling right now; what you are exhaling,
the trees are inhaling at this very moment. This transaction is ongoing. Whether you are
aware of it or not, one half of your pulmonary system is hanging up there right now on a tree!
You have never experienced this interdependence; you have probably, at the most, thought
about it intellectually. But if you had experienced this connection, would anyone have to tell
you, "Plant trees, protect the forests, save the world"? Would it even be necessary?
Taking responsibility is not a convenient philosophy to reconcile you to the way things are.
It is simply waking up to reality. This ability to respond to the entire universe is already a
physical reality. It is only your thoughts and emotions that need to become conscious of the
fact.
Suppose something goes wrong in your office. Perhaps you think it was due to a particular
colleague's ineptitude. You could haul her up, lose your temper, fire her. Your blood pressure
is likely to rise; the office atmosphere will be vitiated; the aftereffects of your rage will
probably be felt by you and your fellow workers for days and weeks after the incident; you
will probably have to work particularly hard at restoring the peace and reestablishing a
situation of mutual trust.
There is another choice. You could simply see the situation the way it is and take
responsibility for it. Taking responsibility is not accepting blame instead of assigning it. It
simply means consciously responding to the situation. Once you take responsibility, you will
invariably start exploring ways to address the situation. You will look for solutions.
If you are frequently in this mode, your ability to craft your life situations will keep
enhancing itself. With this enhanced competence to deal with life and its multiple
complexities, you begin to rise to positions of possibility and power. If you assume absolute
responsibility within yourself for all that is around you, you will become the center of any
situation at home, work, or even the universe. Since you become indispensable to these
situations, there is no sense of insecurity or incompleteness within you anymore.
Only if you realize you are responsible do you have the freedom to create yourself the way
you want to be, not as a reaction to the situations in which you exist. Reactivity is enslavement.
Responsibility is freedom. When you are able to create yourself the way you want, you can

create your life the way you want as well. Your outer life may not be a hundred percent in
your control, but your inner life always will.
On the other hand, the first reaction -- anger -- usually provokes unintelligent action. Anger
is fundamentally self-defeating. If you look at your life closely, you will find that you have
done the most idiotic and life-negative things when you were angry. Above all, you were
working against yourself. If you work against yourself, if you sabotage your own well-being,
you are obviously choosing unintelligence as a way of life.
I am not propounding a moral argument here. I am not telling you that you should not lose
your temper because it is ethically wrong. If anger is a pleasant experience, blow your top.
What's the problem? The point is it is singularly unpleasant -- for you and for those at the
receiving end. It is also counterproductive and therefore inefficient.
I am not offering a rage-control or anger management strategy either. When I first came to
the United States, I heard everybody talking about "stress management." It puzzled me. Why
would anybody want to manage stress? I always thought we managed the things that are
precious to us -- our money, our business, our family. It took me time to see that people have
assumed that stress is an inevitable part of their lives! They do not see that it is entirely self-
created and self-inflicted. Once you take charge of your inner life, there is no such thing as
stress.
The point is that anger is rooted in your false perception that you can change the situation
by losing your temper with it. But your life experience tells you time and again that the
reverse is true, that you can never change any situation for the better by forsaking your sense
and intelligence. You only mess up your situations by getting angry. Once you see that clearly,
you've taken the first step toward change.
Besides, there is substantial medical and scientific evidence to prove that in a state of anger,
you are literally poisoning your system. This can be verified with something as simple as a
blood test. When you are angry, your very chemistry is altered, and your system turns toxic.
Intense activity and sleep are times when this chemical mess can undo itself. But if you are in
frequent states of rage, you are heading toward physical and psychological disaster. There is
no doubt about this.
There is a commonly held belief that rage produces results; that nothing happens in the
world without the adrenaline rush of anger. The iconic figure of the Cuban revolution, Che
Guevara, famously said, "If you tremble with indignation at every injustice, you are a
comrade of mine." Perhaps that is true. But in rage, you become one with a group; out of
rage, you become one with the universe.
Once it happened…A gentleman carrying an infant was traveling from London to Bristol on a
train. Another gentleman entered the compartment, dumped his two huge suitcases, and sat
beside the first.

As you know, Englishmen don't immediately speak to each other. So, the first gentleman
waited very politely for a while. Then he turned to the second passenger and said, "Looking at
your suitcases, I presume you are a salesperson? I am also one."
The gentleman said, "Yes, I am a salesman."
Another genteel pause. Then the first passenger asked, "What do you sell?"
The other replied, "I sell helical gears." Another decorous silence. Then he asked the first
gentleman, "And what do you sell?"
He said, "I sell condoms."
Shocked, the second gentleman said, "You sell condoms and you are taking your son with
you on your business? Is that appropriate?"
"This is not my son," replied the first passenger. "It's a complaint from Bristol."
Human beings are in a perennial state of complaint. They carry their complaints with them
like a badge of their identity. There are many who live their lives lamenting that life has been
particularly unfair to them. They cite instances of all the terrible things that have befallen
them, the chances they never got, the many injustices they have suffered. Maybe it is even true.
What most people forget is that the past exists within each one of us only as memory.
Memory has no objective existence. It is not existential; it is purely psychological. If you
retain your ability to respond, your memory of the past will become an empowering process.
But if you are in a compulsive cycle of reactivity, memory distorts your perception of the
present, and your thoughts, emotions, and actions become disproportionate to the stimulus.
The choice is always before you: to respond consciously to the present; or to react
compulsively to it. There is a vast difference between the two. And it can make the world of a
difference.
If terrible things have happened to you, you ought to have grown wise. If the worst possible
events have befallen you, you should be the wisest of the lot. But instead of growing wise,
most people become wounded. In a state of conscious response, it is possible to use every life
situation -- however ugly -- as an opportunity for growth. But if you habitually think, "I am the
way I am because of someone else," you are using life situations merely as an opportunity for
self-destruction or stagnation.
I once heard a moving account of a woman who used one of the most horrific life
situations to transform herself into a beautiful being. In the beginning of the Second World
War, a bunch of Nazi soldiers broke into a house in Austria. They took the adults away
separately, and the two children -- a thirteen-year-old girl and an eight-year-old boy -- were
taken to a railway station. As they waited along with other children for the train to arrive, the
boys started a game. Oblivious to what lay in store, they started playing, as children are wont
to do.
A cargo train arrived and the soldiers started packing everyone into it. Once they were in,
the little girl noticed that her brother had forgotten to bring his shoes. It was an Austrian
winter, a bitter one. Without shoes, you could lose your feet. The girl lost her temper. She
shook her kid brother, boxed his ears, and abused him. "You idiot! Don't we have enough

trouble on our hands? We don't know where our parents are, we don't know where we're
going! And now you go and lose your shoes? What am I supposed to do with you?"
At the next station, the boys and girls were separated. And that is the last that the brother and
sister ever saw of each other.
About three and a half years later, the girl came out of the concentration camp. She
discovered she was the only one alive in her family. Everyone else had vanished, including
her brother. All that remained was the memory of the harsh words she had uttered the last time
she had seen him alive.
That was when she made a life-changing decision: "It doesn't matter who I meet, I will
never speak to them in a manner that I regret later, because this meeting could be my last." She
could have spent her life in defeat and remorse, but she made this simple decision, which
transformed her life phenomenally. She went on to live a rich and fulfilled life.
The most horrific things in life can be a source of nourishment if you accept, "I am
responsible for the way I am now." It is possible to transform the greatest adversity into a
stepping-stone for personal growth. If you take one hundred percent responsibility for the
way you are now, a brighter tomorrow is a possibility. But if you take no responsibility for
the present -- if you blame your parents, your friend, your husband, your girlfriend, your
colleagues for the way you are -- you have forsaken your future even before it comes.
You come into this world with nothing and you go empty-handed. The wealth of life lies
only in how you have allowed its experiences to enrich you. Filth can blossom into the
fragrance of a flower. Manure can transform itself into the sweetness of a mango. No
adversity is an impediment if you are in a state of conscious response. No matter what the
nature of the situation you are in, it can only enhance your experience of life, if you allow it
to.
Resentment, anger, jealousy, pain, hurt, and depression are poisons that you drink but
expect someone else to die. Life does not work that way. Most people take lifetimes to
understand this simple truth.
Now that we have established what responsibility is, it is time to look at what it is not. Let us
start by clearing up a few fundamental misconceptions.
For one, many believe that taking responsibility compromises their freedom. This seems to
be logically true, on a simplistic level. Existentially, it is completely off the mark.
Let us consider a concrete scenario. Your pen falls off a table. If you see you are
responsible for it, you have several choices before you. You could simply bend down and
pick it up. If you are unable to do that, you could ask someone to help. Or if you aren't
inclined to act on it right now, you might pick it up later. You have a variety of options.
If, on the other hand, you don't take responsibility for it, what can you do? Nothing.

Which is freedom? To have choices or to have none?
Your logical mind tells you, "Give up all responsibility and you will be free." But in your
experience of life, the more you are able to respond to everything around you, the freer you
are! The logical and experiential dimensions of life work in diametrically opposite ways.
Logic is not without its uses, but these help only to handle the material aspects of life. If you
handle your entire life with logic alone, you will end up a mess.
Secondly, people often confuse responsibility with reaction. We have already demonstrated
earlier that there is a world of difference between the two. The first is born in awareness, the
second in unawareness. The first is born in consciousness, the second in unconsciousness.
The first is freedom, the second enslavement.
It is time to make yet another distinction. Responsibility is not reaction but it is not action
either.
Responsibility and action belong to different dimensions. The ability to respond gives you
the freedom to act. It also gives you the freedom not to act. It puts you in the driver's seat of
your life. It empowers you to decide the nature and volume of action you want to undertake.
Responsibility is not compulsive action; it offers you the choice of action.
Can you act upon everything in the world today? No, but you can respond to everything in
the world today. Action has to be judiciously performed, depending on a careful analysis of
resources -- strength, capability, energy, age, situation. Your ability to act is always limited,
but there are no limitations on your ability to respond. If you are willing, you can respond to
just about anything.
Just because you are responsible for your children, are you able to do everything for them?
If you did everything for them, you would mess up their lives. Your sense of responsibility
makes you do certain things for them and not do others. So, responsibility does not mean
unbridled action. Far from it.
How, you may ask, are you responsible for the violence and injustice in the world? How
are you responsible for the war and the bloodshed, the atrocities against the marginal and the
underprivileged, all over the world? Certainly you are not to blame for any of it. But the
moment you become conscious of any of these events, you do respond -- either in concern,
love, care, hate, anger, indignation, or even action. It is just that this is often an unconscious
reaction rather than a conscious response. If you make this ability to respond into a willing
process, that marks the birth of a tremendous new possibility within you. Your inner genius
begins to flower.
Can you then respond to the moon? You can. Your body and life energies certainly do.
When entire oceans rise in response to the cycles of the moon, do you think the water content
in your own system doesn't rise as well? Maybe you aren't an astronaut; maybe you can never
walk on the moon. But you can respond to the moon. In fact, you already do. You can just
choose to do it -- willingly, consciously.
And that brings us to the fourth misconception. Many think responsibility means capability.
Wrong again. When it comes to action, capability could play a role. But when it comes to
response, it is just a question of willingness.

If you see someone dying on the street, are you responsible?
If you are willing to respond, you will explore various options. If you are a doctor, you
will try direct intervention. If you are not, you may call 911. Or if all this is being done by
someone else, you will at least have concern in your heart. But if you are not responsible, you
will just sit there like a stone watching someone die before your eyes.
Your ability to respond is the way you are. Only your ability to act is connected with the
outside world. Responsibility is not about talking, thinking, or doing. Responsibility is about
being. That's the way life is -- not an independent, self-contained bubble but a moment-to-
moment dialogue with the universe. You don't have to work at making it that way. You just
have to see it the way it is.
Let us deepen the exploration. If responsibility is "response-ability," the capacity to be
responsive to situations, let me ask you another question: is your ability to respond limited or
limitless?
Are you capable of responding to a plant?
You are.
To a stranger on the street?
You are.
To the moon?
You are.
To the sun, to the stars?
You are.
To the whole cosmos?
You are.
In fact, as we have seen, every subatomic particle in your body is responding in a limitless
way to the great dance of energies that is the cosmos. The only reason you are not
experiencing the life process in all its majesty and profundity is your current state of mental
resistance. Your psychological structure is a stone wall. If you are willing, every moment of
your life can be a fantastic experience. Just the act of inhaling and exhaling can be a
tremendous love affair.
Why is the mind resisting this?
Because it is crippled by its own limited logic which says, "Taking responsibility for just
two people already gives me a headache. If I take responsibility for the whole world what will
happen? I'll crack up!"
Through millions of years of evolution, nature has caged you within certain boundaries -- 
this is the human predicament. But this imprisonment is only on the level of biology. On the

level of human consciousness, you are like a bird in a cage without a door. What a tragic
irony! It is only out of long aeons of habit that you are refusing to fly free.
Life has left everything open for you. Existence has not blocked anything for anyone. If you
are willing, you can access the whole universe. Someone said, "Knock and it shall open." You
don't even have to knock, because there is no door. It is open. You just have to walk through,
that's all.
This is the sole purpose of the spiritual process. The life and work of every spiritual guide,
across history and across culture, has been just this: to point out that the cage door does not
exist. Whether you fly or choose to remain in the limitations of the cage -- let that be a
conscious choice.
The possibility of ultimate freedom may seem deeply threatening to many. Yes, it is a threat
 -- but only to your limitations. Do you want to live a life of voluntary self-imprisonment?
Limiting your responsibility is to suffocate yourself on various levels -- physically,
intellectually, and emotionally. Unfortunately, this stifling of life is understood by people as
safety, as security.
Take the case of a seed. If the seed constantly tries to save itself, a new life is impossible.
The seed goes through the tremendous struggle of losing what it believes is its identity -- 
losing its safety and integrity and becoming vulnerable -- in order to grow into a many-
branched leafy tree, abundant in fruit and flower. But without that vulnerability, that voluntary
openness to transformation, life won't sprout.
One of the biggest problems in the world today is loneliness. It is quite incredible. The
planet is teeming with seven billion people, but people are lonely! If someone enjoys being
alone, there is no problem at all. But most people are suffering because of it! They are going
through serious psychological problems as a consequence. If you are lonely, it is because you
have chosen to become an island unto yourself. It doesn't have to be this way. "I am not
responsible" makes you unwilling to get along with anyone -- until you can't even get along
with yourself. It often comes to a point when you believe you are not even responsible for
what is happening within yourself!
What the mind forgets is that the ability to respond is the basis of life. If the ability is
acknowledged willingly, you become blissful. If it happens unwillingly, you become
miserable.
Being responsible is taking ownership of your life. It means you have taken the first radical
step to becoming a complete human being -- fully conscious and fully human. In taking
responsibility and beginning the journey toward conscious living, you are putting an end to
the age-old patterns of assigning blame outward or heavenward. You have begun the greatest
adventure life has to offer: the voyage inward.
This notion of responsibility, as you might have noticed, seems to lead us seamlessly to

another word, remarkably similar in its implications. A word we know well. Perhaps much
too well. A much-used, much-abused four-letter word.
Love.
You know the teachings, of course. All over the world, people have been told that love is
the ultimate, love is supreme, love is divine, that we must love our neighbors, and so on. All
wonderful teachings. But when you try to become loving, it is difficult and often ends up
seeming pretentious. Have you noticed this? It seems easier to not love at all than to try to
become loving!
But to be loving is simply this: a willingness to respond freely and openly. Right now, it
may be limited to one or two people in your lives. But it is possible to extend this ability to
embrace the entire world.
Does it mean going out into the streets and hugging everyone? No. That would be crazy -- 
not to mention, irresponsible. As we have said, responsibility is not about action, but a way of
being. Love is not something you do; it is just the way you are.
Right now, you have left one window in your life open -- for a few people. You did that
because somewhere you understood that if you closed that window, you'd go mad. Your only
options would be insanity or suicide. But there is another way to approach this. Does it mean
opening another window? Or opening a door?
Here's a more effective option: why don't you just demolish the wall?
Love has nothing to do with someone else. It is all about you. It is a way of being. It
essentially means you have brought sweetness into your emotion. If a loved one travels to
another country, would you still be able to love them? You would. If a loved one passed away,
would you still be able to love them? You would. Even if a loved one is not physically with
you anymore, you are still capable of being loving. So, what is love then? It is just your own
quality. You are only using the other person as a key to open up what is already within you.
Why are you fumbling with keys when there is no lock, when there is no door, when there
is no wall? You create illusory walls and doors and then create illusory keys -- and then you
fumble with the keys! And once you find the key, you are terrified of losing it!
For most people, love is initially a joy, but after a while it becomes an anxiety. Why?
Because this "key" has legs and a will of its own. You can't keep it in your pocket or hang it
around your neck. When you try to do that, two lives are heading straight for disaster!
Once your joy is on self-start rather than push-start, you have upgraded your technology.
You are no longer enslaved to an external source -- whether a person or a situation. You are
now capable of being loving and blissful without doing anything in particular, just sitting
here, no matter how anyone in the outside world behaves. Once you experience this inner
freedom, you will never experience insecurity in your life again. And anyway, when you are a
truly blissful human being, everyone will naturally want to be around you! Blissfulness means
life is happening in an exuberant manner, and that is that all life seeks.
So, how does one upgrade one's inner technology?
We will look at this at length in the following chapters. But a fundamental step would be to

recognize consciously just this: "My ability to respond is limitless, but my ability to act is
limited. I am one hundred percent responsible for everything I am and everything I am not, for
my capacities and my incapacities, for my joys and my miseries. I am the one who determines
the nature of my experience in this life and beyond. I am the maker of my life."
Absolutely nothing is required -- no reaction, no action, no capability -- other than being
aware of the basic fact that your responsibility is limitless. You could sit in one place and be
aware of it. You could walk the street and be aware of it. You could be working, cooking, or
even lying in bed, and be aware of it.
Let me ask you another question: whatever your religion or cultural background, what
exactly do you mean when you use the word "God"?
The forms, the names, the ideas are varied. But essentially, when you say "God," you mean
that which is responsible for everything in the universe. Suppose God said, "I will not be
responsible for you." He is most definitely fired! The very word "God" signifies limitless
responsibility.
So, responsibility is not a teaching in civics. It is the simplest and easiest way for you to
express your own divinity.
The whole effort of the spiritual process is to break the boundaries you have drawn for
yourself and experience the immensity that you are. The aim is to unshackle yourself from the
limited identity you have forged, as a result of your own ignorance, and live the way the
Creator made you -- utterly blissful and infinitely responsible.
After my experience on Chamundi Hill, one thing became clear to me. In life, there is no
"this" and "that"; there is only "this" and "this." This means everything is here and now. The
access for everything is here and now. And it lies only in one's ability to respond -- in one's
ability to experience and express the divine.
There is no "yes" and "no." There is just "yes" and "yes"! The choice is yours. You can
either react to life with "yes" and "no," which will mean a perpetual division of this existence,
which is the basis of repetitive cycles of conflict and misery. Or you can become one big YES
to life.
Limited responsibility is a way of drawing boundaries. What you think you are responsible
for will be within your boundary. What you think you are not responsible for will be outside
your boundary. But limitless responsibility extends itself way beyond your present level of
understanding and perception. There is more -- much more -- to life than you are aware of
right now. Once you choose to become conscious of this simple fact -- my ability to respond is
limitless -- suddenly life within you reorganizes itself in a completely different way. You
move into higher and higher levels of freedom within yourself. Life is now a wonderful and
exhilarating journey of self-discovery.
The outside world has seen its share of bloody revolutions. They were violent because

there were some people who were willing to change and there were some who were
unwilling. But in the inner life, there is only one kind of revolution and it is a silent one. It is
about moving from unwillingness to willingness.
The question is: do you want to be a full-time human being or a part-time human being? If
you restrict your ability to respond, the scope and dimension of your experience will be
unsurprising, predictable, limited, narrow. But to be an absolutely full-time human being is to
be a constant full-blooded response to everything. You don't have to do anything in particular.
You just need to become a willing piece of life in this glorious living cosmos.
Responsibility is not burdensome. Boundaries are burdensome. If you draw yourself a
boundary, whether of ideology, caste, creed, race, or religion, you cannot move beyond it and
you end up stuck for no reason at all. These boundaries only end up breeding fear, hatred, and
anger. The bigger your boundary, the more burdensome it becomes. But if your responsibility
is limitless, where's the boundary?
No boundary, no burden.
This is the turnaround in human consciousness that needs to take place.
Once this happens, it is not that the cosmos begins to happen your way. Instead, what you
are becomes cosmic.
This is not transcendence; this is homecoming.
Sadhana
Don't simply believe what you are reading. The only way to find out whether something is true or untrue is
to experiment with it. Stop the internal debate and simply put it to the test. The yogic path is not a path of
inherited belief; it is the path of experiment.
Here's a practical way to begin.
When you have your next meal, do not talk to anyone around you for the first fifteen minutes. Just be in
active conscious response to the food that you eat, the air that you breathe, the water that you drink.
As I have said earlier, your entire system is responding anyway. Just become conscious of it. This apple,
this carrot, this piece of bread -- don't take them lightly. If you do not eat for a couple of days, you won't
think about God. You will only think about food. This is what is nourishing you and making your life right
now. This is the very substance of your body. Respond to food absolutely, with total attention.
This fruit, this egg, this bread, this vegetable -- they are all a part of life themselves, but they are willing
to become you. Would you be willing to do this for anyone? You are not willing to lose your identity and
merge into anyone. You are not even willing to surrender your little finger for someone else. Momentarily,
you surrender just a little, usually when you need something. Your love affairs are the product of very
calculated surrender. But food, which is a life unto itself, gives itself up completely to become a part of
you.
Later, without even uttering the sentence aloud, take the simple idea -- "My responsibility is limitless; if I
am willing, I can respond to everything" -- into the entire day. Be conscious of it until the last moment
before you fall asleep and remind yourself of it the first thing when you wake up.
If you sustain this awareness of your limitless nature for just one full minute, you will achieve a
tremendous transformation. A minute may seem very simple, but you will see it will take a certain level of
application to arrive at this. Just one minute can elevate you to a different dimension of experience and

function. Right now, your awareness is erratic: this moment you are aware and the next moment, you are
gone. It is okay. Every hour, remind yourself. Experiment with this awareness, allow it to deepen and see
what happens.
Conscious response brings you to a profound and enduring state of connectedness with life -- not as an
idea or an emotion, but life as life is. In this willing, active involvement with life, you are embraced by it
and that embrace takes you to the very source of creation.
That is all it takes to touch the Creator -- just willingness, nothing else.

Patanjali's Yoga Sutras, one of the most profound documents on the yogic sciences, begins
with a strange line: "…And now, yoga."
A great document on life starts with just half a sentence! Why?
This is because you arrive at yoga only when you realize that your desire is essentially for
the limitless, and that absolutely nothing else will settle you. Every human being lives in a
perpetual state of insufficiency. No matter who you are or what you have achieved, you still
want a little more than what you have right now. This is human desire. But the fundamental
desire within every human being is for boundless expansion.
Most people are not aware of the nature of their longing. When their longing finds
unconscious expression, we call this greed, conquest, ambition. When their longing finds
conscious expression, we call this yoga.
If you still believe that everything will be okay the moment you find a new girlfriend or
boyfriend, get a raise, buy a new house or car, then it is not yet time for yoga. Once you've
tried all those things and more, and clearly know that none of it will ever be enough -- then
you are ready.
So now, yoga.
What exactly is yoga?
If you were to close your eyes and conjure an image, it would probably be one of bodies
twisted 
into 
impossible 
postures. 
Bone-bending, 
muscle-knotting, 
teeth-gnashing
contortionism -- that, for many, is yoga!
The trend is changing nowadays to some extent, and many yoga studios also impart
breathing techniques and meditation processes. So, for some people, the image of yoga might
be one of serenely smiling faces and perfect bodies seated effortlessly in lotus position.
But none of that is what we mean when we talk of the science of yoga.
Yoga is not a practice. It is not an exercise. It is not a technique. The images in popular
consciousness point to a bowdlerized form of yoga that has now pervaded the world. This is a

travesty of a science of extraordinary grandeur and profundity that originated on the Indian
subcontinent.
The science of yoga is, quite simply, the science of being in perfect alignment, in absolute
harmony, in complete sync with existence.
The many fluctuations of the outside world have their impact on each one of us. But yoga is
the science of creating inner situations exactly the way you want them. When you fine-tune
yourself to such a point where everything functions beautifully within you, naturally the best
of your abilities will flow out of you.
You have surely noticed that when you are happy, you always function better. You seem to
have an endless supply of energy. You can go on and on, even without eating or sleeping. Just
a little happiness liberates you from your normal limitations of energy and capability.
When your body and mind are in a relaxed state, you are also free of several nagging
ailments. Let's say you go and sit in your office with a headache. A headache is not a major
disease. But just that throbbing can take away a whole lot of your capability at work and your
enthusiasm for the job -- and perhaps for life itself. A simple headache can turn what is most
precious to you into a source of vexation or even misery. (This also works conversely. When
your loved ones are irritated with you, they invariably feign a headache!) But with the practice
of yoga, your body and mind can be maintained at the highest possible level of capability and
efficiency.
And yet, yoga is not just a self-help tool for greater mental and physical efficiency -- and
freedom from headaches. It is all that and much more.
Modern science tells us that all of existence is just energy manifesting itself in different
ways and in different forms. This means that the same energy that can sit here as a rock can lie
there as mud, can stand up as a tree, can run like a dog -- or be here reading this book, as you.
So, you are essentially a morsel of energy that is part of the much larger energy system of the
universe. The cosmos is just one big organism. Your life is not independent of it. You cannot
live without the world because there is a very deep moment-to-moment transaction between
the two of you.
Although everything in the universe is the same energy, it functions at different levels of
capability in different forms. The same energy functions in one plant to create roses; in
another plant it functions to create jasmine. With the same material with which people made
earthen pots we now make computers, cars, and even spacecrafts! It is the same material; we
have just started using it for higher and higher possibilities. Essentially, natural evolution is a
similar phenomenon: from the same material of this planet, what an incredible journey has
been made, from an amoeba to a human being!
It is the same with our inner energies. Yoga is the technology of upgrading, activating, and
refining these inner energies for the highest possibilities. Suddenly, your capabilities reach a
level of brilliance that you never imagined possible. An accidental and limited life turns near-
miraculous.
But yoga performs an even deeper function than ensuring well-being at body, mind, and
energy levels. Literally, yoga means "union." When you are in yoga, it means that in your

experience, everything has become one. This is the essence of the science. This is also its
deepest aim.
What is this union? What unites with what?
Right now, you are aware of someone called "me" and someone called the "other." This
"me" and "other" can be extended to groups of people, communities, and nations, but
fundamentally "me" and "other" is the basis of conflict in the universe. The whole point of
yoga is to bring you to an experience wherein, if you sit here, there is no such thing as "you"
and "me." It is all me -- or all you! Any process that helps you to reach this union is yoga.
How can this union be achieved?
There are several ways. But let us start at the beginning -- with our ideas of what constitutes
an individual. If I were to start telling you things you did not know, you would have a choice:
to believe or disbelieve me. Either way, you have only concretized your assumptions, whether
positive or negative. This will only take you into flights of fanciful imagination. But the
whole process of yoga is to take you, step by step, and stage by stage, from the known into the
unknown. It is a hundred percent empirical science. It does not ask you to take anything on
trust. It urges you to experiment every step of the way.
So, first let us look at what exactly you understand by the word "myself." Right now, in
your understanding, this "you" is constituted by your body, your mind (which includes your
thoughts and emotions), and your energies. Your energies may not be in your experience
currently, but you know them by inference: if your body and mind function as they do, there
must be some kind of energy empowering them. These three realities -- body, mind, energy -- 
are what you know. They are also what you can work with.
Yoga tells us that we are actually composed of five "sheaths," or layers or, more simply,
bodies. As there is a medical physiology, there is a yogic one as well. It leads us from the
gross to the subtlest levels of reality. Do you have to believe in it? No. But it is a useful place
at which to start our exploration. Your fundamental area of work, however, is only with the
realities that you are aware of.
The first sheath or layer to which yoga draws our attention is the physical body -- the
annamayakosha, or more literally, the food body. What you call the "body" right now is just
an accumulated heap of food. It is the product of all the nourishment you have ingested over
the years. That is how it gets its name.
The second layer is the manomayakosha, or the mental body. Today, doctors are talking a
great deal about psychosomatic ailments. This means that what happens in the mind affects
what happens in the body. This is because what you call "mind" is not just the brain. It is not
located in any single part of the human anatomy. Instead, every cell has its own intelligence,
so there is an entire mental body, an entire anatomy of the mind.
Whatever happens in the mental body happens in the physical body, and, in turn, whatever
happens in the physical body happens in the mental body. Every fluctuation on the level of the
mind has a chemical reaction, and every chemical reaction, in turn, generates a fluctuation on
the level of the mind.
The physical and mental bodies are like your hardware and software. Hardware and

software cannot do anything unless you plug into quality power. So, the third layer of the self
is the pranamayakosha, or the energy body. If you keep your energy body in perfect balance,
there will be no disease in your physical or mental bodies. Today there is scientific evidence
to show that the impact of genetic memory on the human being is not absolute. Except the
fundamental aspects of the DNA, everything can be changed, including the genetic trends of
susceptibility to ailments. Infectious diseases happen because of external organisms, but
chronic diseases are manufactured daily by human beings. When your energy body is in full
vibrancy and proper balance, chronic diseases cannot exist in the body. I could introduce you
to thousands of people who have gotten rid of their physical and psychological ailments just
by doing certain simple yogic practices. These practices are not aimed at the disease. They are
just aimed at bringing a certain harmony and vitality to the energy body.
These are the three dimensions of the self you are aware of right now: the physical, the
mental, the energetic. They are essentially physical in nature, though each is more subtle than
the preceding one. It is like a lightbulb, electricity, and light -- all these are physical. One you
can hold in your hand; the other you can feel; and the third takes a sensitive receptor, like the
eye, to experience. But they are essentially physical, which is why you can experience them
through your sense organs.
However, there is a fourth layer called the vignanamayakosha, or the etheric body. Gnana
means "knowledge." Vishesh gnana means "extraordinary knowledge" -- that which is beyond
the sense perceptions. This is a transient state. It is neither physical nor non-physical. It is like
a link between the two. It is not in your current level of experience, because your experience
is limited to the five sense organs which cannot perceive the non-physical. Those who report
near-death experiences are those who could have slipped accidentally into this state. Such an
experience occurs when, for some reason, people's physical, mental, and energy bodies have
become feeble. If you learn to find conscious access to this dimension, there will be a
quantum leap in your ability to know the cosmic phenomenon.
There is also a fifth sheath, the anandamayakosha, which is beyond the physical entirely.
Ananda means "bliss." It has nothing to do with the physical realms of life. A dimension that is
beyond the physical cannot be described or even defined, so yoga talks about it only in terms
of experience. When we are in touch with that aspect beyond the physical, we become blissful.
It is not that a bubble of bliss lies within your physical structure. It is just that when you access
this indefinable dimension, it produces an overwhelming experience of bliss.
But bliss is not a goal in itself. Once you touch this dimension of nonexistence, blissfulness
is guaranteed. In this state, you are no more an issue in your own life. When you are no more
an issue, you can fearlessly explore the beyond.
When you touch this dimension beyond definition, the impact of time and space is
obliterated. This accounts for the many stories of yogis sitting unmoving for incredibly long
periods of time. This is possible not because of physical endurance, but because in these
states, they are not available to the process of time. They have touched a dimension beyond all
the contradictions of here and there, now and then; a limitless ocean of emptiness where there
is neither bondage nor freedom -- an existence beyond existence.

Yoga does not ask you to work with anything other than what you know. It simply tells you
that if the physical, mental, and energy bodies are perfectly aligned, you will find access to the
bliss body. But your work, as we said before, is only with the first three bodies.
When it comes to external realities, each human being is differently capable. What one
does, the other may not be able to do. But when it comes to inner realities, all of us are
equally capable. There is no guarantee that you will be able to sing, dance, climb a mountain,
or make money, merely because you want to. But making your inner life blissful is something
that everyone is capable of. It cannot be denied to you, if you are willing. Once you master
certain basic yogic technologies of inner well-being, your journey through life becomes
absolutely effortless. You are able to express yourself at your fullest potential without any
stress or strain. You can play with life whichever way you want, but life cannot leave a single
scratch upon you.
So, to experience well-being all you need is a certain mastery over these three dimensions of
body, mind, and energy. Being successful in the world depends on your ability to harness
these dimensions, according to the needs of your life situations and the activity you want to
perform. But yoga is also the science of aligning these three dimensions so that you reach the
ultimate state of ecstatic union with life itself.
How does one reach this ultimate union?
Yoga tells us there are a few fundamental ways. If you employ your physical body to reach
this ultimate union, we call this karma yoga, or the yoga of action. If you employ your
intelligence to reach your ultimate nature, we call this gnana yoga, the yoga of intelligence. If
you employ your emotions to reach your ultimate nature, we call this bhakti yoga, the yoga of
devotion. And if you use your energies to reach the supreme experience, we call this kriya
yoga, the yoga of transforming energies.
Every human being is a unique combination of the same ingredients. All these aspects -- 
karma, gnana, bhakti, kriya -- have to function in an integrated way, if one wants to get
anywhere. If these four dimensions -- body, mind, emotion, energy -- don't walk together, you
will be one big mess.
Once it happened…Four men were walking in the forest. The first was a gnana yogi, the
second was a bhakti yogi, the third was a karma yogi, and the fourth was a kriya yogi.
Usually, these four people can never be together. The gnana yogi has total disdain for every
other type of yoga. His is the yoga of the intellect, and typically, an intellectual has complete
disdain for everybody else, particularly these devotional types who look upward and chant
God's name all the time. They look like a bunch of idiots to him.
But a bhakti yogi, a devotee, thinks all this gnana, karma, and kriya yoga is a waste of time.
He pities the others who don't see that all you need to do is know that God exists, hold his
hand, and walk in trust. All this mind-splitting philosophy, this bone-bending yoga is absurd

to him.
Then there is the karma yogi, the man of action. He thinks all the other types are just plain
lazy. Their lives are pure self-indulgence.
But the kriya yogi is the most disdainful of all. He laughs at everyone. Don't they know that
existence is just energy? If you don't transform your energy, whether you long for God or
for anything else, nothing is going to happen! There can be no transformation.
These four people customarily cannot get along. But today they happened to be walking
together in the forest. Suddenly, a storm broke out. It grew fierce. The rain started pouring
down relentlessly. Drenched to the skin, the four yogis started running, looking desperately
for shelter.
The bhakti yogi, the devotion man, said, "There's an ancient temple in this direction. Let's
go there." (As a devotee, he was particularly familiar with the geography of temples.)
They ran in that direction. They came to an ancient temple; all the walls had crumbled long
ago; just the roof and four columns remained. They rushed into the temple -- not out of any
love for God, but just to escape the rain.
There was a deity in the center. They ran toward it. The rain started lashing from every
direction. There was no other place to go, so they moved closer and closer. Finally, there was
no alternative. They just sat down and embraced the idol.
The moment these four people hugged the idol, suddenly God appeared.
In all their minds the same question arose: why now? They wondered, "We expounded so
many subtle and arcane philosophies, worshipped at every possible sacred shrine, great and
small, selflessly served so many people, did so much body-breaking penance, but you never
showed up. Now when we're just escaping the rain, you turn up. Why?"
God said, "At last you four idiots got together."
Yoga is, quite simply, the science of bringing the four idiots together.
Right now, for most people, these four dimensions are aligned in different directions. Your
mind is thinking one way; your emotions pull you another way; your physical body another
way; your energy another way. This makes you a potential calamity, an accident waiting to
happen. You are being hijacked -- you are being pulled apart, in four different ways.
It is now time to plunge into the adventure of self-alignment, into the remarkable empirical
system that is yoga -- one that enables you to be both alchemist and experiment, subject and
object at the same time.
And so, the next section of this book turns pragmatic. Having mapped the terrain, we now
embark on a real journey, a conscious journey of self-discovery and self-reclamation. We
will explore the nature and possibilities of the first three yogic layers, or sheaths -- namely,
body, mind (which includes thought and emotion), and energy. It will also introduce you to

strategies by which you can turn each of these layers into a tool for transformation, an
instrument of knowing.
The problem is that religious nuts around the world have exported everything that is
beautiful about a human being to the other world. If you talk of love, they speak of divine
love. If you talk of bliss, they speak of divine bliss. If you talk of peace, they speak of divine
peace. We have forgotten that these are all human qualities. A human being is fully capable of
joy, of love, of peace. Why do you want to export these to heaven?
There is so much talk of God and heaven mainly because human beings have not realized
the immensity of being human. It is obvious that the very source of life is throbbing within
you in some way. The source of your life is also the source of every other life and the source
of all creation. This dimension of intelligence or consciousness exists in every one of us. The
deliverance of every human being lies in finding access to this deathless dimension.
To be joyful and peaceful within yourself every moment of your life, to be able to perceive
life beyond its physical limitations -- these are not superhuman qualities. These are human
possibilities.
Yoga is not about being superhuman; it is about realizing that being human is super.

A Note to the Reader
The next part of the book grows more specific, taking you deeper into an exploration of the
three fundamental sheaths, or layers, of identity, that every human being is conscious of.
Accordingly, it is divided into three sections: Body, Mind, and Energy.
Within each section, the book seeks to extend your ideas of what constitutes the physical,
the psychological, and the pranic (or energetic). In the process, you may find some
assumptions interrogated, some clichés punctured, some commonly used terms redefined, and
some unusual perspectives explored.
But you are required to take nothing on faith. Yoga, as we have said before, asks you to
experiment -- and encourages you to do so fearlessly. And so, this section oscillates between
information and suggested practice and self-observation exercises. It concretizes concepts and
suggests ways to implement ideas. In the process, you can find out for yourself whether these
concepts are workable, or if they are simply so much hot air.
What is the best way to approach this section? You may not feel inclined to implement each
of the exercises offered in the "Sadhana" boxes. That is absolutely fine. The reason for
offering you a range of practices and tips is so that you can zero in on any that appeal to you.
These steps are simply intended to help you make the transition from the page to the business
of daily living, to offer you the freedom to test every hypothesis in the laboratory of your
own life. This section aims at turning you from a passive reader, an armchair yogi, into a
dynamic participant in the magic of a life consciously lived, freely chosen.
It's time to roll up your preconceived notions and gear up for an uninhibited exploration of
the incredible life that you are.

The Ultimate Machine
The most intimate part of physical creation for all of us is our own bodies. The physical body
is the first gift of which we are aware. It is also the ultimate machine. Every other machine on
the planet has come out of this.
The yogic sciences, as explained above, do not speak of the mind or the soul. Everything is
just a body -- whether it is a food body, a mind body, an energy body, an etheric body, or a
bliss body. There is a deep wisdom in this approach. It does not allow us to escape into
deluded psychological states or into flights of metaphysical abstraction. It grounds us firmly
in the tangible, even as it leads us into subtler realms of physicality and, gradually, into the
beyond.
The physical body is designed and structured to function by itself without much of your
intervention. You don't have to make the heart beat, the liver perform all its complex
chemistry, or even try to breathe; everything that is needed for your physical existence to
manifest itself is happening on its own.
The body is a pretty complete and self-contained instrument. If you are fascinated by
machines, there isn't a better one! This is the most sophisticated piece of machinery on this
planet -- it embodies the highest level of mechanics, the highest level of electronics, the most
sophisticated electrical circuitry you can imagine.
Let us say you eat a banana this afternoon. By evening, this banana has become you.
According to Charles Darwin, it took millions of years to make a monkey into a human
being, but in just a few hours you are capable of making a banana or a piece of bread into a
human being! Obviously, the very source of creation is functioning within you.
There is an intelligence at work within you, way beyond your logical mind, which can
transform a bit of food into the highest piece of technological excellence. If you could
achieve that transformation consciously (instead of unconsciously), if you could bring even a
drop of that intelligence into your daily life, you would live magically, not miserably.
It is because he experienced the source of creation throbbing within him that the twelfth-
century Indian mystic Basavanna famously called the body a "moving" temple. "My legs are
pillars," he says in one of the well-known verses of South Indian mystical literature, "the body
the shrine / the head a cupola of gold…"

"Something there is that
doesn't love a wall"
It takes a certain amount of awareness for a person to see the limitations of this fantastic
machinery. As a machine, the body is actually faultless. The only problem is that it does not
take you anywhere. It just springs out of the earth and falls back into the earth.
Isn't that enough?
If you look at it from the perspective of the body, it is quite enough. But somehow, a
dimension beyond physicality has infused itself into this wonderful mechanism. This
dimension is the very source of life. It is this dimension that truly makes us who we are.
Life is one thing, but the source of life is another. In every creature, in every plant, in every
seed, this source of life is at work. In a human being, this source of life is even more
magnificently obvious.
It is because of this that suddenly after a while, all the wonderful gifts that the body offers
somehow seem to turn irrelevant and trivial. It is because of this that you and every other
human being seem to live in a constant struggle between the physical and the dimension
beyond the physical. Though you have the compulsiveness of the physical, you also have the
consciousness of being more than just physical.
There are two basic forces within you. Most people see them as being in conflict. One is the
instinct of self-preservation, which compels you to build walls around yourself to protect
yourself. The other is the constant desire to expand, to become boundless. These two longings
 -- to preserve and to expand -- are not opposing forces, though they may seem to be. They are
related to two different aspects of your life. One force helps you root yourself well on this
planet; the other takes you beyond. Self-preservation needs to be limited to the physical body.
If you have the necessary awareness to separate the two, there is no conflict. But if you are
identified with the physical, then instead of working in collaboration, these two fundamental
forces become a source of tension.
All of the "material-versus-spiritual" struggles of humanity spring from this ignorance.
When you say "spirituality," you are talking about a dimension beyond the physical. The
human desire to transcend the limitations of the physical is a completely natural one. To
journey from the boundary-based individual body to the boundless source of creation -- this is
the very basis of the spiritual process.
The walls of self-preservation that you build for today are the walls of self-imprisonment
for tomorrow. Boundaries that you establish in your life as a protection for yourself today
will feel like constraints tomorrow. Robert Frost captured a deep truth when he wrote,
"Something there is that doesn't love a wall."

Because your self-preservation instinct keeps telling you, "Unless you have walls you are
not safe," unconsciously you keep building them. Later, you struggle with them. This is an
endless cycle. But creation is not unwilling to open to you the doors to the beyond. It is not
creation's unwillingness that you are struggling with. You are struggling with the walls of
resistance that you have built around yourself.
That is why the yogic system does not talk about God. It does not talk about the soul or
heaven. Such talk invariably makes people hallucinatory. Yoga talks only about the barriers
that you have set up, because this resistance is all that needs to be attended to. The Creator is
not looking for your attention. The ropes that bind you and the walls that block you -- these
are one hundred percent of your making. And these are all you need to unknot and dismantle.
You have no work with existence. You only have work with the existence that you have
created.
If I were to use an analogy, I would juxtapose gravity and grace. Gravity is related in a way
to the fundamental instinct of self-preservation in a human being. We are rooted to the planet
right now because of gravity. We have a body today only because of gravity. Gravity is trying
to hold you down, whereas grace is a force that is trying to lift you up. If you are released
from the physical forces of existence, then grace bursts forth in your life.
As gravity is active, grace too is constantly active. It is just that you have to make yourself
available to it. With gravity you have no choice; you are available to it, anyway. If you are
strongly identified with the physical, gravity is all that you will know. But with grace, you
have to make yourself receptive. Whatever kind of spiritual practice you do, ultimately, you
are just working toward making yourself available to grace.
When you are available to grace, suddenly, you seem to function like magic. Suppose you
were the only one who could ride a bicycle, you would begin to seem magical to everyone
else! It is the same with grace. Others might think you are magic, but you know you are just
beginning to become receptive to a new dimension of life. This possibility is available to
everybody.
Sadhana
You may have noticed this about yourself: when you are feeling pleasant, you want to expand; when you
are fearful, you want to contract. Try this. Sit for a few minutes in front of a plant or tree. Remind yourself
that you are inhaling what the tree is exhaling, and exhaling what the tree is inhaling. Even if you are not
yet experientially aware of it, establish a psychological connection with the plant. You could repeat this
several times a day. After a few days, you will start connecting with everything around you differently.
You won't limit yourself to a tree.
Using this simple process, we at the Isha Yoga Center have unleashed an environmental initiative in the
South Indian state of Tamil Nadu, under which twenty-one million trees have been planted since 2004. We
spent several years planting trees in people's minds, which is the most difficult terrain! Now transplanting
those onto land happens that much more effortlessly.

Life Sense: Knowing Life
Beyond the Senses
How does the human body make sense of the world? What is its source of knowing?
The answer is obvious: through the five senses.
Whatever you know of the world or yourself is information you have gathered only
through the five sense organs -- by seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching. If these
sense organs fold up, you would know neither the world nor yourself.
When you sleep every night, suddenly the people around you disappear, the world
disappears, and even you disappear. You are still alive, everybody around you is alive, but in
your experience everything evaporates, because these five sense organs have gone into
"shutdown" mode.
The sense organs are limited. They can perceive only that which is physical. If your
perception is limited to the five senses, naturally the scope of your life will be restricted to the
physical. Additionally, the senses perceive everything only in relation to something else. If I
touch a metal object and it feels cool to my fingers, it is simply because my body temperature
is warmer. Suppose I lower my temperature and touch it, it would feel warm to me.
The sense perceptions are absolutely wonderful instruments for human survival. They are
turned on at the moment of your birth because they are essential to your survival in the
outside world. But if you are seeking something more than survival, they are not enough.
They give you a distorted impression of reality because they are entirely relative in their
perception.
If you are really interested in knowing life in all its depth and dimension, it is imperative
that you look inward, not out. Why? Because the essential nature of life does not lie in the
physical or psychological expression of body and mind, but in their source. However,
looking inward doesn't happen easily. It takes work, because you don't yet have the perceptual
mechanisms to look within. The human predicament is just this: the very seat of your
experience is within you, but your perception is entirely outward bound.
This is why there is such a big disconnect between within and without. You can see what is
outside you, but you cannot see what is inside you. Even if someone whispers, you can hear it,
but there is so much activity happening in the body that is beyond your ability to hear. If even
an ant crawls upon your skin you can sense it right away, but there is so much blood flowing
within you that you cannot feel. Your sense organs can only register external sensations of
sight, sound, smell, taste, and touch. But the source of all experience is within you. An
experience may be triggered by an external stimulus, but its origin is always internal -- and
there are times when the same experience can be generated even without an external trigger.

Yoga is fundamentally aimed at enhancing your experience beyond the five senses. There is
a dimension beyond your five sense perceptions. You can call that dimension whatever you
please. You can call it "self," if you choose. You can call it "divine," if you choose. You can
term it "God," if you choose. The terminology is entirely up to you.
And even if you are not in quest of the divine or the self, enhancing your perception can
play a vital role in assuring a fundamental level of well-being. Whatever you are -- doctor,
policeman, engineer, artist, homemaker, or student -- fundamentally, it is your quality of
perception that determines how effective and successful you are and how much you can do on
this planet. The expansion of your sense perception beyond its present boundaries can achieve
phenomenal results, bringing a completely new and seemingly magical dimension to your
life.
The common questions are: "Is it very difficult to enhance my perception? Do I have to
withdraw to a Himalayan cave to turn inward?"
Not at all. This possibility does not come from sitting somewhere on top of a mountain; it
is within you. The only reason it has been inaccessible is that you are either busy or
preoccupied with what is happening outside or far too engaged in your own psychological
drama. It is just a lack of attention which has denied people the possibility of discovering what
lies within.
Turning inward does not have anything to do with thoughts, ideas, opinions, or
philosophies. It has nothing to do with the psychological activity of your mind. Enhancing
your perception means enhancing your ability to receive life, just as it is. If you are willing to
dedicate just a few minutes of your life to this every day, you would see the change. The
simple process of paying a little bit of attention to your inner nature will transform the quality
of your life in remarkable ways.
Sadhana
Start by paying attention to everything you think of as yourself just before you fall asleep: your thoughts,
your emotions, your hair, your skin, your clothes, your makeup. Know that none of this is you. There is no
need to make any conclusion about what "you" are or what "truth" is. Truth is not a conclusion. If you
keep the false conclusions at bay, truth will dawn. It is like your experience of the night: the sun has not
gone; it is just that the planet is looking the other way. You're thinking, reading, talking about the self,
because you're too busy looking the other way! You haven't paid enough attention to know what the self
really is. What is needed is not a conclusion, but a turnaround. If you manage to enter sleep with this
awareness, it will be significant. Since there is no external interference in sleep, this will grow into a
powerful experience. Over time, you will enter a dimension beyond all accumulations.

Listening to Life
There are several ways to attain a state of abiding joy and ultimate union. These are diverse,
but it is important that they are all addressed in a balanced and integrated way. There is really
no division or hierarchy between these varied approaches. Yoga is completely evenhanded: it
employs all the aspects of who you are to take you to your ultimate destination.
The body constitutes a very large part of who you are in your present understanding. The
science of using the body to hasten your evolutionary process is hatha yoga. Ha denotes the
sun and tha denotes the moon. Hatha yoga is the science of bringing about a balance between
these two dimensions within the human system.
The body has its own attitudes, its own resistance, its own temperament. Let us say you
decide, "Starting tomorrow, I will get up at five in the morning and go for a walk." You set
the alarm. The alarm rings. You begin to stir, but your body groans and says, "Shut up and
sleep." That is often the way it is, isn't it? So, hatha yoga is a way of working with the body, a
way of disciplining, purifying, and preparing it for higher levels of energy and for greater
possibilities.
Hatha yoga is not exercise. It is, instead, about understanding the mechanics of the body,
creating a certain atmosphere, and then using physical postures to channel or drive your
energy in specific directions. This is the aim of the various asanas, or postures. That kind of
posture that allows you to access your higher nature is a yogasana. It is the science of aligning
your inner geometry with the cosmic geometry.
To put it in the simplest way, just by observing the way some people sit, you can almost
know what is happening with them, if you have known them long enough. If you have
observed yourself, when you are angry, you sit one way; if you are happy, you sit another
way; if you are depressed, you sit another way. For every different level of consciousness, or
psychological state, your body naturally tends to assume certain postures. The converse of
this is the science of asanas. If you consciously get your body into different postures, you can
elevate your consciousness.
The body can become a means for your spiritual growth or it can become a barrier. Let's
suppose some part of your body -- your hand, leg, or back, for instance -- is in pain. When the
pain is acute, it is hard to aspire to anything higher because that pain becomes dominant in
your life. Right now if you have a backache, the biggest issue in the universe is your back.
Other people may not understand that, but for you, that is the biggest issue. Even if God
appears before you, you will plead for your backache to go away! You will not ask for
anything else because the physical body has such power over you. When it doesn't function as
it should, it can rob your life of every other aspiration. All your longings just disappear once
the body is in pain. To experience pain and still look beyond it takes an enormous amount of

strength, which most people do not possess.
There are countless people who have come out of spinal problems by doing simple asanas.
Doctors had told them they would have to undergo surgery, but they were able to avoid it
altogether. Your back can be restored to such an excellent condition that you never need to
visit a chiropractor again. It is not only your spine that becomes flexible; you become flexible
as well. Once you are flexible, you are willing to listen. It is not about hearing someone talk;
you are willing to listen to life. Learning to listen is the essence of intelligent living.
Dedicating a certain amount of effort and time to see that the body does not become a
barrier is important. A painful body can become an obstacle, and so can a compulsive body.
Simple compulsions, whether of hunger or lust, can rule you so strongly that they will not
allow you to look beyond the physical. It is easy to forget that the physical body is only a part
of you; it is important that it does not become the whole of you. Asanas help level the physical
body down to its natural place.
As you move into deeper dimensions of meditation, your energies will surge upward,
opening up more profound dimensions of experience. It is very important, therefore, that the
pipeline of the body is conducive. If it is blocked, it will not work. And so, preparing the body
sufficiently before one goes into more intense forms of meditation is very important. Hatha
yoga ensures that the body takes the upsurge of energy smoothly and joyfully.
For a lot of people, spiritual growth happens very painfully because the necessary
preparation has not taken place. Most human beings have unfortunately allowed themselves to
be molded entirely by external situations. It is becoming a norm in the world that growth
happens only painfully. It can also happen blissfully, but that is when both the body and mind
have been prepared. Asanas can prepare you for growth and transformation by equipping you
with a solid and stable foundation.
Today, the hatha yoga that people are learning is not the classical form in its full depth and
magnitude. The "studio yoga" that you see today is largely the physical aspect of the science.
Just teaching the physical aspect of yoga is like having a stillborn baby. It is not only
inefficient; it is a tragedy. If you want a live process, it needs to be transmitted in a manner
that is inclusive of other dimensions of yoga.
Hatha yoga does not mean standing on your head or holding your breath. It is the way that it
is done that makes all the difference. There was a time when I personally taught hatha yoga as
a two-day program. People would be overwhelmed with intensity at these programs; tears of
ecstasy would flow, simply with the practice of asanas. Why doesn't this happen more often?
Simply because hatha yoga is being imparted as an end unto itself, rather than as a
preparatory system. Consequently, while the hatha yoga in the world today brings peace for a
few and health for others, it is unfortunately a painful circus for many. This may be fine for
someone whose aspiration is only peace and health. But you are looking at yoga as a means
of transforming yourself into a receptive possibility beyond the five senses, the hatha yoga
needs to be approached in its classical form.

Sadhana
Look around. Among your family, coworkers, and friends, can you see how everyone has different levels
of perception? Just observe this closely. If you know a few people who seem to have a greater clarity of
perception than others, watch how they conduct their body. They often have a certain poise without
practice. But just a little practice can make an enormous difference. If you sit for just a few hours a day
with your spine erect, you will see that it will have an unmistakable effect on your life. You will now
begin to understand what I mean by the geometry of your existence. Just the way you hold your body
determines almost everything about you.
Another way of listening to life is paying attention to it experientially, not intellectually or emotionally.
Choose any one thing about yourself: your breath, your heartbeat, your pulse, your little finger. Just pay
attention to it for eleven minutes at a time. Do this at least three times a day. Keep your attention on any
sensation, but feel free to continue doing whatever you are doing. If you lose attention, it doesn't matter.
Simply refocus your attention. This practice will allow you to move from mental alertness to awareness.
You will find the quality of your life experience will begin to change.

Downloading the Cosmos
Until recently in India, after every storm, you had to go up to your roof and adjust your TV
antenna. Only if it was angled in a certain way did the world pour into your living room. Or
else, as you were watching your favorite soap opera or football match, a blizzard would
suddenly appear on your screen.
The body is like that antenna: if you hold it in the right position, it becomes receptive to all
there is in existence. If you hold it another way, you will remain absolutely ignorant of
everything beyond the five senses.
Here is another analogy: Your body is like a barometer. If you know how to read it, it can
tell you everything about you and the world around you. The body never lies. So in yoga, we
learn to trust the body. We transform the physical body from a series of compulsions of flesh,
blood, and hormones into a conscious process, a powerful instrument of perception and
knowing. If you know how to read the body, it can tell you your potential, your limitations,
even your past, present, and future. That is why the fundamental yoga starts with the physical
body.
It is as simple as this. The more you know about your telephone or any other gadget, the
better you can use it. A few years ago, the cellphone companies conducted a survey, and found
that ninety-seven percent of the people were using only seven percent of a phone's
capabilities. I am not talking about the smartphone here, but the "dumb" one! Even with that
simple gizmo, people were using only seven percent.
Now, as we have already said, this body of yours is the ultimate machine, the perfect state-
of-the-art gadget. What percentage of this machine do you think you are employing?
Well below one percent! To conduct your life in the material world, to ensure your
survival, you do not need even one percent of the body's capabilities. We are doing all kinds
of trivial things with it because right now our whole perception of life is limited to the
physical nature of existence. But your body is capable of perceiving the whole universe. If
you prepare it properly, it can grasp everything in this existence, because all that happens to
this existence is happening, in some way, to this body.
All physical creation is fundamentally a certain perfection of geometry. Without geometry,
no physical form is possible. If we get the geometry of the human body right, it becomes
capable of reflecting the larger geometry of the cosmos within, and making the cosmic
available for our experience. In other words, the human body is capable of downloading the
entire cosmos.

Sadhana
Sit in any comfortable posture, with your spine erect, and if necessary, supported. Remain still. Allow your
attention to slowly grow still as well. Do this for five to seven minutes a day. You will notice that your
breath will slow down.
What is the significance of slowing down the human breath? Is it just some respiratory yogic acrobatics?
No, it is not. A human being breathes twelve to fifteen times per minute, normally. If your breath settles
down to twelve, you will know the ways of the earth's atmosphere (i.e., you will become
meteorologically sensitive). If it reduces to nine, you will know the language of the other creatures on this
planet. If it reduces to six, you will know the very language of the earth. If it reduces to three, you will
know the language of the source of creation. This is not about increasing your aerobic capacity. Nor is it
about forcefully depriving yourself of breath. A combination of hatha yoga and an advanced yogic
practice called the kriya, will gradually increase your lung capacity, but above all, will help you achieve
a certain alignment, a certain ease, so that your system evolves to a state of stability where there is no
static, no crackle; it just perceives everything.

INTENSITY OF INACTIVITY
Logically, somebody who never put effort into anything should be the master
of effortlessness. But it is not so. If you want to know effortlessness, you need
to know effort. When you reach the peak of effort, you become effortless.
Only a person who knows what it is to work understands rest. Paradoxically,
those who are always resting know no rest; they only sink into dullness and
lethargy. This is the way of life.
For the Russian ballet dancer Nijinsky, his entire life was dance. There were
moments when he would leap to heights that seemed humanly impossible.
Even if one's muscles are at peak performance, there is still a limit to how
high one can jump. But in some moments he would seem to transcend even
that limit.
People often asked him, "How do you manage this?"
He said, "There is no way I can ever do it. When Nijinsky is not there, only
then it happens."
When someone is constantly giving a hundred percent, a point comes when
one surpasses all limits and reaches total effortlessness. Effortlessness does
not mean becoming a couch potato. It means transcending the need for
physical action. Only when you are able to stretch to your utmost and sustain
the peak of effort do you reach this. There are some people nowadays, who
declare that they would like to opt for Zen as a spiritual path because they think
it means doing nothing! In fact, Zen involves tremendous activity because it is
not divorced from life in any way. For example, a Zen monk may take weeks
to simply arrange pebbles in a Zen garden. In performing such activity, you
reach a state of non-doing, where you transcend the experience of being a
doer. It is in such states that you have a taste of the beyond.
If you achieve such states through intense activity, as Nijinsky and many
others have, those moments will always be cherished as magical. But if you
arrive at the same state through the intensity of inactivity, then it is a yogic
posture, and it is a state that can be sustained longer.
The very essence of dhyana, or meditativeness, is that you push yourself to
the highest possible intensity where, after some time, there is no effort. Now
meditation will not be an act, but a natural consequence of the intensity that has
been achieved. You can simply be. It is in these absolutely non-compulsive
states of existence that the necessary atmosphere is set for the blossoming of

an individual into a cosmic possibility.
If we, as societies and individuals, continue to allow every moment to pass
by without setting the atmosphere for such a flowering, we have squandered a
tremendous possibility. There is so much infantile talk about heaven and its
pleasures only because the immensity of being human has not been explored.
If your humanity overflows, divinity will follow and serve you. It has no other
choice.

Morsel of the Earth
Your physical body, as yoga reminds us, is annamayakosha, or a food body, just a heap of the
nourishment you ingest. The food that you consume is, in turn, just the earth. You are a small
outcrop of this planet prancing around and claiming to be an autonomous entity. But since you
are a small extension of the earth, whatever happens to the planet happens to you too -- in
some subtle and sometimes not-so-subtle ways.
This planet is part of a larger body that we call the solar system. What happens to that
system affects the planet. This solar system is part of a larger body we call the universe.
Maybe it is beyond your perception right now, but because your physical form is just a
fragment of the planet, everything that is happening to any part of the universe is also in some
way happening to you!
As incredible as it sounds, if you maintain your physical body in a certain way, you will
become aware of subtle changes that happen in the planet and the cosmos. Once you become
sensitive to it, your whole body feels everything happening around you. If you spend more
time and pay attention to the ways of the earth, this sensitivity will increase dramatically.
I lived on a farm for a few years. There was a man in the local village who was hard of
hearing. His name was Chikkegowda. Because he could barely hear, he could not respond to
people, so they thought he was an idiot. He was rejected by the village and made an object of
ridicule. I employed him as my man on the farm. He was a nice companion to have because I
wasn't particularly interested in talking, and he could not talk because he could not hear. So,
no problem! Those were the days before tractors; life on the farm was all about bullocks and
ploughs. One day, suddenly, at four o'clock in the morning, I saw him preparing the plough.
I asked him, "What's happening?"
He said, "I am getting ready to plough, sir."
I said, "But what will you plough? There is no rain."
He said, "It will rain today."
I looked up. It was an absolutely clear sky. I said, "What nonsense! Where is the rain?"
He said, "No, sir, it will rain."
And it did.
I sat up for days and nights after this. Why couldn't I feel what this man could feel? I sat,
holding my hand in different positions, trying to feel the moisture, the temperature, trying to
read the sky. I read all kinds of books on meteorology, but it felt like I was up against a wall.
But then, with careful observation of my own body and what was around me, I discovered the
most fundamental mistake that most of us make: the fact that we view the ingredients which

constitute our body, like earth, water, air, and food, as commodities and not as an organic part
of the life process.
After persevering for about eighteen months, I understood. And now if I say it is going to
rain, ninety-five percent of the time it will. This is not astrology or magic, but a surmise
based on the minute observation of a completely different level of the human system and its
ongoing transaction with the planet, the air, and everything around. If it is to rain today, some
change will happen in your body. Most urban-dwellers cannot feel it, but many rural people
all over the world do sense this. Most insects, birds, and animals can feel it. A tree for sure
knows it.
Recognizing these small changes in the planetary system, the ancients tried to make use of
them not just for their own well-being, but for transcendence. The magnetic equator of the
planet flows through India. A few thousand years ago, yogis pinpointed the exact location of
the magnetic equator and built a whole string of temples along this area for very specific
reasons. One of the most famous temples is the South Indian temple of Chidambaram, which
was set up for those who sought ultimate spiritual union. At the time of its construction, it was
located exactly on the magnetic equator (which has since shifted).
Many spiritual seekers gathered in Chidambaram over the centuries at those times when the
planet was in a certain position. In this temple, a shrine was consecrated by Patanjali, the
father of yoga, to shoonya, which literally translates into "emptiness" or "no-thing." This is
not mere symbolism. At the magnetic equator there is no pull toward north or south; there is
zero degree of magnetic play, and this promotes a certain balance and equanimity in the life
of the spiritual seeker. This equanimity can be a powerful device to liberate oneself quite
literally from the limitations of the physical world, which makes this region the ideal
geographic location for a seeker. (It is important to remember that the magnetic equator is
distinct from the geographic equator.)
The additional significance of Chidambaram is that it happens to be located on eleven
degrees latitude. When it was built, there was a convergence of the magnetic equator with this
latitude -- a rare and important occurrence. What was the significance of this location? The tilt
of the planet at this latitude impels centrifugal forces in a nearly vertical direction, which, in
turn, pushes energy upward through the human physiological system. This means that the
ascent of human energy -- the aim of the spiritual journey -- is actually assisted by nature.
Since this was a great source of encouragement to seekers, this entire region was considered
to be sacred. (It is not a coincidence that the Isha Yoga Center in South India is located bang
on eleven degrees latitude.)
The kind of spiritual system described above makes use of natural phenomena to support
human efforts at spiritual growth. Another system -- of meditativeness, or inwardness -- 
completely ignores the changes happening in creation and focuses solely on the inner
journey. These are the two fundamental ways in which the spiritual journey can be
approached: you can either go slowly, step-by-step, accepting all natural assistance available
to you, or you can ignore all the steps and take the inward leap. The second entails a
withdrawal from external life situations; the first makes involvement mandatory. Every

human being is free to choose the path more suitable to his or her temperament. In the times
in which we live, a balance between the two is usually best.
Sadhana
The body responds the moment it is in touch with the earth. That is why spiritual people in India walked
barefoot and always sat on the ground in a posture that allowed for maximum area of contact with the
earth. In this way, the body is given a strong experiential reminder that it is just a part of this earth. Never is
the body allowed to forget its origins. When it is allowed to forget, it often starts making fanciful
demands; when it is constantly reminded, it knows its place. This contact with the earth is a vital
reconnection of the body with its physical source. This restores stability to the system and enhances the
human capacity for rejuvenation greatly. This explains why there are so many people who claim that their
lives have been magically transformed just by taking up a simple outdoor activity like gardening.
Today, the many artificial ways in which we distance ourselves from the earth -- in the form of
pavements and multi-storied structures, or even the widespread trend of wearing high heels -- involves an
alienation of the part from the whole and suffocates the fundamental life process. This alienation manifests
in large-scale autoimmune disorders and chronic allergic conditions.
If you tend to fall sick very easily, you could just try sleeping on the floor (or with minimal organic
separation between yourself and the floor). You will see it will make a big difference. Also, try sitting
closer to the ground. Additionally, if you can find a tree that looks lively to you, in terms of an abundance
of fresh leaves or flowers, go spend some time around it. If possible, have your breakfast or lunch under
that tree. As you sit under the tree, remind yourself: "This very earth is my body. I take this body from the
earth and give it back to the earth. I consciously ask Mother Earth now to sustain me, hold me, keep me
well." You will find your body's ability to recover is greatly enhanced.
Or if you have turned all your trees into furniture, collect some fresh soil and cover your feet and hands
with it. Stay that way for twenty to thirty minutes. This could help your recovery significantly.

In Sync with the Sun
The surya namaskar is a familiar sequence of postures to many who have practiced or know
something of yoga. Generally, people understand the surya namaskar as a physical exercise.
Others view it with some suspicion as some form of sun worship. It is neither. Yes, it most
definitely does strengthen your spine and muscles and more, but that is not the objective.
What then is the significance of what is often seen as a sun salutation?
Firstly, this is not a salutation at all. It literally means organizing the solar energies within
you, based on the simple logic that all life on this Earth is solar-powered. The sun is the life
source for this planet. In everything that you eat, drink, and breathe, there is an element of the
sun. Only if you learn how to better "digest" the sun -- internalize it, and integrate it into your
system -- do you truly benefit from this process.
Those who do surya namaskars regularly find that their batteries last longer, with less need
for recharge or replenishment. Additionally, the surya namaskar aids the balance or
reorganization of inner energies, in terms of right and left, or lunar and solar dimensions.
This produces an innate physical and psychological equilibrium that can be an enormous asset
in one's daily life.
As I mentioned before, when I was young, I had to be forcibly awakened every morning by
my mother. But once I began yoga, my system came awake effortlessly at a certain hour every
day. Life began to happen with that much more ease and equanimity.
The surya namaskar is essentially about building a dimension within you where your
physical bodily cycles are in sync with the sun's cycles, which run about twelve and a quarter
years. It is not by accident but by intent that it has been structured with twelve postures. If your
system is in a certain level of vibrancy and readiness, and in a high state of receptivity, then
naturally your cycle will be in sync with the solar cycle.
Young women have an advantage because they are also in sync with the lunar cycles. It is an
advantage, but a lot of them treat it as a curse. It is a fantastic possibility that your body is both
connected to the solar and the lunar cycles. Nature has granted this advantage to a woman
because she has been entrusted with the responsibility of propagating the human race. So she
has been given some extra privileges, which unfortunately have been perceived socially as
disadvantages. People do not know how to handle the bonus energy generated at that time and
hence treat it as a curse, and even a kind of madness. (The word "lunatic" is derived, as we
know, from "lunar.")
The physical body is a fantastic stepping-stone for higher possibilities, but for most people
it functions as a roadblock. The compulsions of the body do not allow them to go forward.
Practicing surya namaskar maintains physical balance and receptivity, and is a means of
taking the body to the edge, so that it is not a hurdle.

Between the menstrual cycle, which is the shortest cycle (a twenty-eight-day cycle), and the
cycle of the sun, which is over twelve years, there are many other kinds of cycles. The word
"cyclical" denotes repetition. It also means going round in circles and not getting anywhere.
Repetition means, on some level, compulsion. Compulsiveness implies something that is not
conducive for consciousness.
Anything that is physical, from the atomic to the cosmic, is cyclical. Either you ride the
cycle or are crushed by it. Yogic practice is always aimed at enabling you to ride the cycle, so
you have the right kind of foundation for consciousness.
It must be remembered that the repetitive nature of cyclical movements or systems, which
we traditionally refer to as samsara, offers the necessary stability for the making of life. If
everything was random, it would not be possible to house a steady life-making machine. For
the solar system and for the individual, being rooted in cyclical nature gives a certain
firmness and steadiness to life. The very nature of the physical world is cyclical.
But once life has reached the level of evolution that human beings have attained, it is natural
to aspire not just to stability, but to transcendence. Now, it is left to individual human beings
either to remain trapped in the cyclical, or to use these cycles for physical well-being, or
finally to go beyond the cyclical entirely.
If you are compulsive, you will see that situations, experiences, thoughts, and emotions in
your life will be in cycles. They keep coming back to you once every six or eighteen months,
three years, or six years, depending on your degree of compulsiveness. If you just look back
on your life, you will notice this. If they come once every twelve years, that means your
system is in a high state of receptivity and balance.
The surya namaskar is an important process to enable that to happen. On a rudimentary
level, it is a complete workout for the physical system -- a comprehensive exercise form
without any need for equipment. But above all, it is an important tool that empowers human
beings to break free from the compulsive patterns of their lives.
There are variations of this practice, depending on an individual's aspirations. Someone
who seeks muscular fitness can practice a basic process that is known as surya shakti.
Through practice, if one attains a certain level of stability and mastery over the system, one
could be introduced to a more powerful and spiritually significant process called the surya
kriya. While the surya namaskar is about balancing the two dimensions of sun and moon (or
masculine and feminine) within the human system, the surya kriya is about connecting these
two fundamental divisions for further spiritual growth.

A LEGENDARY YOGI
Raghavendra Rao, the yoga teacher I met as a boy, led a life that would be
considered superhuman by conventional standards. He was known as
Malladihalli Swami because he hailed from the village of Malladihalli, which
is in the southwestern Indian state of Karnataka.
He was known to do 1,008 surya namaskars a day. Later, after he was ninety
years of age, he brought the number down to 108 (not because he wasn't
capable, but because there was no time). That was his spiritual practice.
In addition to being a yoga master, he was a wonderful Ayurvedic doctor.
He was one of the few nadi vaidyas -- traditional physicians who diagnose
your ailment by feeling your pulse. He would not only tell you what disease
you had today, but could predict what ailment was likely to afflict you in the
next ten to fifteen years, and would teach the requisite remedial practices. One
day in a week, he would be available in his ashram as an Ayurvedic doctor.
Wherever he was, he would travel back to the ashram on Sunday evening to be
there on Monday morning. If he sat down at four o'clock in the morning, he
was there right through the day till seven or eight o'clock in the evening.
Volunteers would come in shifts to help him, but he himself sat through the
whole day. For every patient who came, he had a joke to tell. People would
forget they had come for treatment. It was less like a doctor-patient interaction
and more of a festival!
This happened when he was about eighty-three years of age: One Sunday,
late at night, he was at a railway station about forty-six miles from his ashram.
He was with two companions, and they discovered that there was a railway
strike. This meant no trains and no other means of transport. His commitment
to his work was such that he left his two companions on the platform and just
ran forty-six miles overnight on the railway tracks!
At four o'clock in the morning he was at the ashram, ready to treat his
patients. People at the ashram did not even realize that he had come running.
Only when his other two friends reached there did they tell the others what
Swamiji had done! That is how incredibly he lived. He lived up to the age of a
hundred and six and taught yoga until his dying day.

Elemental Mischief
Life is a game of just five ingredients. Even a pizza requires more ingredients! But in yoga
both the human body and the cosmos are based on the magic of only five elements -- earth,
water, fire, air, and ether. Such a staggeringly complex phenomenon and just five variables!
Not surprisingly, those who attained self-realization have often termed life a cosmic joke.
Once, when I was driving after midnight, I approached a mountain. As I drove toward it, I
saw that almost half the mountain was ablaze! I am not known to shy away from danger, so I
continued to drive. But I was cautious, because I knew I was in a car full of flammable fuel
and I had my little girl in the backseat. It was misty and the farther I drove up the mountain, the
fire always seemed to be a little farther away. Then I realized that although all the terrain that I
saw from down below looked like it was on fire, as I drove into it, there was nothing at all.
When I reached the actual site of the fire, I saw that a truck had broken down. The driver
and a couple of others had built a small fire for themselves because of the cold. As the mist
reached dew point, the million droplets in the air, each one acting as a prism, created such a
phenomenal illusion that a little fire seemed like a major conflagration. From down below, it
looked like the whole mountain was aflame! That incident left me astounded.
Creation is just like that, hugely magnified. Those who have looked within themselves
closely and attentively realized there was no need to look at the macro version. The entire
cosmos is just a magnified projection of a little occurrence happening within you -- the play
of five elements. This is all it takes to make a throbbing full-fledged human being!
Maybe your desire is individual or maybe it is universal. But whether you want to realize
the full potential of this human mechanism or merge with the larger cosmic mechanism, you
need a certain measure of mastery over these five elements. Without this you know neither the
pleasure of being an individual nor the bliss of uniting with the cosmic.
Whether your physical body is a stepping-stone or a hurdle on your path to well-being,
essentially depends on how you are able to manage these five. If they do not cooperate with
each other, nothing significant ever happens to you. But with their cooperation, your life -- 
from the basic to the highest aspects -- suddenly becomes a tremendous possibility.
The body is like a doorway. If you are always facing closed doors, then for you a door
means a deterrent. If doors are always opening up for you, then for you a door means a
possibility. They say how long a minute is essentially depends on which side of the bathroom
door you are! Those inside say, "Just a minute, I'm coming." That one minute, for the person
outside, is an eternity!
Every spiritual practice in the world is related in some way with organizing these five
elements. The most fundamental practice in the yogic system is bhuta shuddhi -- the cleansing

of the elements in the physical system so that they work in harmony. All yogic practices are
essentially derived from the cleansing of these elements. The basis of individual existence is
actually memory, which penetrates deep into these five elements. Cleansing the elements of
the compulsive tendencies that percolate into the individual as a result of mental, genetic,
evolutionary, and karmic memory, helps bring a sense of absolute harmony between the
individual and the cosmos. (We will look at the role of memory at greater length in a later
chapter.)
When you achieve a level of expertise in your yogic practice, you approach what is called
bhuta siddhi, or mastery over the elements. With this mastery, life opens up its bounty to you.
Health, well-being, clarity, enlightenment -- none of these can be denied to you anymore.
So whether you experience life as a great possibility or a great barrier simply depends on
the extent to which these five elements cooperate with you. Freedom and bondage -- both are
determined by these five elements. The very existence that traps you also sustains you. This is
the paradox of the life process. Love and hate, freedom and entrapment, life and death are all
encapsulated in each other. If they were separate, there would be no problem; you could deal
with them. The problem is, they are inextricable. If you try to avoid life, you only end up
avoiding death!
In ancient India, there were courtesans who were masters in the art of seduction. They wore
elaborate jewelry that seemed impossible to remove. The whole body was covered in
ornaments. If you had to take them off one by one, it would take a long time. The man, fired
up by lust, would want to undress this woman, but it was in vain. She would go on
encouraging him with more intoxicants -- a little more, a little more, and a little more. As his
vision grew blurry, his task grew even more difficult, and eventually, he would fall fast
asleep, snoring. But there was just one pin; all it took was to pull this one pin, and everything
would fall down. That trick only she knew.
Life is a bit like that. It is a complex web, but there is one simple pin. And that is your
identity. The play of five elements is highly evolved and complicated, but the key to freedom
is your limited persona. If you pull the plug, it just falls apart and you are free. If you know
how to pull yourself out, life's complexity collapses and everything settles. The simplicity of
perfect alignment with existence is suddenly yours.
Sadhana
The simplest thing that you can do to change the health and fundamental structure of your body is to treat
the five elements with devotion and respect. Just try this. Every time you are consciously in touch with any
of the elements (which you are every moment of your life), just make a conscious attempt to refer to it in
terms of whatever you consider to be the ultimate or the loftiest ideal in your life, whether it is Shiva,
Rama, Krishna, God, Allah (or even Marx!). You are a psychological being right now, and your mind is
full of hierarchy. This process will settle the hierarchy. After some time, the word can fall away. But you
instantly see the change as the number of truly conscious moments in your life increases. The air that you

breathe, the food that you eat, the water that you drink, the land that you walk upon, and the very space
that holds you -- every one of them offers you a divine possibility.

ENSHRINING THE ELEMENTS
In southern India, five major temples were built for each of the five elements.
These temples were created not for worship but to facilitate a specific type of
spiritual practice.
To cleanse the water element you would go to a particular temple and do
one kind of practice. To cleanse the element of air, you would go to another. In
this manner, five wonderful temples were created for each of the elements,
infused with the kind of energy that assisted a particular type of spiritual
practice. Traditionally, seekers traveled from one temple to another, to be
initiated into practices that enabled them to have mastery over the elements and
to achieve healing, well-being, and even transcendence.
These five temples were built so that they functioned as one system. This
was a phenomenal technology. Those who knew the appropriate spiritual
practice could make use of it. Those who did not know the practice could
benefit just by living in that region. The temples still exist, and even those who
do not understand their energy significance marvel at these magnificent works
of architecture.

When the Shit Hit the Ceiling
Once it happened…One day in court the emperor Akbar asked, "What do you think gives the
most pleasure to a person?"
There was a chorus of responses. One courtier said, "Serving God is the greatest pleasure,
Your Highness."
There are always all manner of sycophants around emperors. So someone else said, "Oh
my lord, serving you is the greatest pleasure I can conceive of!"
A third courtier said, "Just gazing at your face is the ultimate joy!"
The hyperbole poured forth. Birbal, the wise, just sat there, bored.
Akbar asked, "Birbal, what makes you so silent? What is it that gives you the greatest
pleasure?"
Birbal said, "Shitting."
Until then, Akbar was feeling great with all the fawning and adoration. Now he got mad. He
said, "For uttering such an obscenity in court, you had better prove it. If you can't prove it,
your life is at risk."
Birbal said, "Give me a fortnight, Your Highness. I'll prove it to you."
Akbar said, "Fine."
The next weekend, Birbal organized a hunting trip for Akbar into the forest, and made sure
all the women in the palace also traveled on this expedition. He set up the camp in such a way
that Akbar's tent was in the center. All around, he placed the families, women and children. He
told the catering department to produce the best food. They produced the choicest delicacies
and Akbar ate well. He was on a vacation, after all.
The next morning when he got up and came out, he saw that there was no toilet tent. He
went back into his tent and walked up and down, but the pressure was building up. He tried to
go into the forest, but Birbal had made sure the womenfolk were all over the place.
Pressure built up by the minute. It was about twelve noon, and Akbar couldn't bear it
anymore. He was just about to burst. Birbal, who was watching this whole scene, kept walking
around, muttering, "Toilet tent, where to put it, where to put it?" He was simply creating
confusion and delaying matters a little longer.
The emperor was full of shit, and just when there was no more time left, they managed to
set up the toilet tent. Akbar went inside and moaned with relief. Then Birbal, who was waiting
for him outside the tent, asked, "Do you agree with me now?"
Akbar said, "It is the greatest pleasure."

Relief from something that you cannot hold within you is always the greatest pleasure, isn't
it? Whatever that thing may be!
So, the body can become an issue. A big issue. A barrier between you and your enjoyment
of life.
If you want to maintain the body in a certain way, it is important to pay attention to the
various activities of the body, in relation to food, sleep, and sex. We will look at each of these
in turn in the next few pages.
Sadhana
It is important not to keep eating through the day. If you are below thirty years of age, three meals every
day will fit well into your life. If you are over thirty years of age, it is best to reduce it to two meals per
day. Our body and brain work at their best only when the stomach is empty. So be conscious of eating in
such a way that within two and a half hours, your food moves out of the stomach, and within twelve to
eighteen hours completely out of the system. With this simple awareness you will experience much more
energy, agility, and alertness. These are the ingredients of a successful life, irrespective of what you
choose to do with it.

Food as Fuel
Your physical body is just an accumulation of food. Yoga pays much attention to food because
what kind of food you put into the system has a tremendous impact on the kind of body you
have constructed. There is a whole yogic science behind what to eat, how to eat, and when to
eat. What kind of stuff you put into it determines the quality of the body and how comfortable
it is with itself.
Are you preparing this body to run as swiftly as a cheetah? Or are you preparing this body
to carry two hundred pounds? Or are you preparing this body so that it becomes conducive
for higher meditative possibilities? You need to eat the right kind of food depending on your
inclination and what you want out of your life.
The way you eat not only decides your physical health, but the very way you think, feel, and
experience life. Trying to eat intelligently means understanding what kind of fuel this body is
designed for and accordingly supplying it, so that it functions at its best.
Let us say you bought a gasoline car, but pumped diesel into it. It might still move around,
but it would not function at its optimal capacity, and its life span would also be substantially
reduced. Similarly, if we do not understand what kind of fuel this body is designed for, if we
just force whatever comes onto our plate into our systems, it will definitely not function at its
optimum capacity and its longevity could be seriously compromised. The compatibility of the
fuel and the machine is of great importance if you are seeking a certain caliber of service.
What kind of food is the human system really designed for?
If you eat certain foods, the body becomes happy. If you eat certain other foods, the body
turns dull and lethargic, and your sleep quota increases. If you sleep for eight hours a day, and
you live a hundred years, you have spent one third of your life sleeping! Another thirty to
forty percent is spent on food, toilet, and other ablutions. There is very little time left for life!
You eat food for energy, but if you eat a big meal, do you feel energetic or lethargic?
Depending upon the quality of the food that you eat, you first feel lethargy, and then slowly
you start feeling energetic.
Why is this so?
One aspect is the fact that your system cannot digest cooked food as it is; it needs certain
enzymes to do so. All the enzymes necessary for the digestive process are not present in the
body alone; the food that you eat also contains these enzymes. When you cook the food,
generally eighty to ninety percent of the enzymes are destroyed. So the body is struggling to
reconstitute these destroyed enzymes. The enzymes that you destroy in cooking can never be
totally re-constituted, so generally, for most human beings, about fifty percent of the food that
they eat becomes waste.
Another aspect is the stress on the system. The body has to process all this food just to get a

small quota of energy for its daily activity. If we ate foods with the necessary enzymes, the
system would be functioning at a completely different level of efficiency and the conversion
ratio of food to energy would be very different. Eating natural foods, in their uncooked
condition, when the cells are still alive, will bring an enormous sense of health and vitality to
the system.
One can easily experiment with this. Don't ask your doctor, your nutritionist, or your yoga
teacher. When it comes to food, it is about the body. Ask the body what kind of food it is most
comfortable with, not your tongue. The kind of food your body feels most comfortable with
is always the ideal food to eat. You must learn to listen to your body. As your body awareness
evolves, you will know exactly what a certain food will do to you. You do not even have to put
it into your mouth. You can develop this kind of heightened sensitivity whereby just looking at
or touching the food will be enough for you to know its potential impact on your system.
Sadhana
You can experiment: arrange the best possible meal for yourself, get angry with something, curse the
whole world, and then eat it. You will see that day how food behaves within you. At the next meal,
approach your food with the reverence that the life-making material deserves and eat it. You will now see
how it will behave within you. (Of course, if you're sensible, you'll ignore the first and only do the
second!)
Most people can bring down the quantum of food they are eating to a third and be much more energetic
and not lose weight. It is just a question of how much receptivity you have created within yourself.
Accordingly your body receives. If you can do the same amount of work, maintain all the bodily
processes, with thirty percent of the food that you eat, that definitely means you are running a much more
efficient machine.

IN A NUTSHELL
The pranic value of all seeds is tremendous, because they represent
concentrated life. This is quite apart from their enormous nutritional value.
What you call a nut is essentially just a seed, and a seed is a wonderful
possibility. A seed is the future of a plant's life. A single seed is capable of
making the entire Earth green. Consequently, consuming anything in seed
form can greatly enhance human health on many levels.
As far as possible, soak the nuts that you intend to consume in water for six
to eight hours, especially if they are dry nuts. All seeds have a certain natural
chemical self-protection. Soaking in water will flush out these toxic substances
and bring them to the surface, and these can be eliminated by peeling off the
skin of the nut. Additionally, soaking them helps lower the concentrated
protein content which sometimes makes them difficult to digest.

Hell's Kitchen
There is an ongoing debate between the proponents of vegetarianism and non-vegetarianism.
I am often asked which is better.
Vegetarians are often inclined to act holier-than-thou, while non-vegetarians often claim
they are more robust and fit for the world, given that they are willing to include all the species
on the planet on their menu. Great philosophies have evolved based on food choices.
In yoga, there is absolutely nothing religious, philosophical, spiritual, or moral about the
food that we eat. It is only a question of whether the food is compatible with the kind of body
that we own.
This compatibility depends on various ends. If being big is your highest aspiration, then
certain types of foods have to be consumed. If you want a body that supports a particular level
of intelligence, or if you want a body with a certain level of alertness, awareness, and agility,
other types of foods must be consumed. If you are not someone who will settle just for health
and the pleasures of life, but want a body perceptive enough to download the cosmos, you will
need to eat in a very different way. Depending on your aspiration, you will accordingly have
to manage your diet. Or if your aspirations involve all these dimensions, you will have to find
a suitable balance.
Keeping aside our personal goals and aspirations, what type of fuel is this body designed
for? This is something to which all of us should first pay attention. Modifications,
adjustments, and adaptations of diet should come later. If it is simply a question of basic
survival, eat whatever you want. But once survival is taken care of and there is a choice, it is
important that you eat consciously, and are led not by the compulsion of the tongue but by the
essential design of your body.
In the animal kingdom, you can largely classify animals as herbivores and carnivores -- 
those that eat vegetable matter and those that consume meat or prey upon other animals.
Between these two categories of creatures, there are fundamental differences in the design and
construction of their physical systems. Since our focus is food, let us explore the digestive
systems of each. The whole alimentary canal is a digestive tract from the lip to the anal outlet.
If you travel down this tube, you will find some very fundamental differences between
herbivores and carnivores. Consider a few significant ones.
For one, you will find that carnivores are capable of only a cutting action in their jaws, but
the herbivores are capable of both cutting and grinding actions. We human beings have both
cutting and grinding actions.
What is the reason for this design difference?

Suppose you take a bit of uncooked rice and place it in your mouth for a minute or more,
you will notice that it turns sweet. This sweetness is happening because right there in your
mouth carbohydrates are getting converted into sugar (an essential part of the digestive
process) by an enzyme called "ptyalin," which is in your saliva. Ptyalin is present in the saliva
of all herbivores, but not in carnivores. So carnivores just have to cut their food into smaller
pieces and swallow it, while herbivores have to chew their food. Mastication involves
grinding and then thoroughly mixing the food with the saliva; hence the design modification
in the jaw.
If mastication happens properly, close to fifty percent of your digestive process would be
finished in the mouth. In other words, the stomach region is expecting partially digested food
to efficiently complete the process. In modern life, people are in such a hurry that we gulp our
rush-hour lunches without the food being properly masticated.
The stomach is burdened not only with undigested food, but also with partially destroyed
food. Today's kitchens have largely become places where food is efficiently destroyed. Food
that is nutritious and full of life is systematically degraded through the cooking process,
which depletes its nutritional value and largely obliterates its pranic value (its capacity to be
spiritually supportive).
Next, if you look at the length of the alimentary canal, for herbivores it is generally about
five to six times the length of their bodies. In carnivores, it ranges from two to three times the
length of their bodies. To put it simply, carnivores have distinctly shorter alimentary canals
than herbivores, and this difference clearly indicates what type of food each species is
supposed to consume.
If you eat raw meat, it takes between seventy to seventy-two hours to pass through your
system; cooked meat takes fifty to fifty-two hours; cooked vegetables twenty-four to thirty
hours; uncooked vegetables twelve to fifteen hours; fruits one and a half to three hours.
If you keep raw meat outside for seventy to seventy-two hours, putrefaction sets in -- one
small piece of meat can evict you from your home! Putrefaction occurs very rapidly in the
summertime, when the temperature and moisture are conducive. Your stomach is always a
tropical place, and if meat stays there for up to seventy-two hours, the level of putrefaction is
very high. This essentially means there is excessive bacterial activity, and your body must
expend a lot of energy to contain the bacterial level, so that it does not cross the line that
separates health from illness.
If you visit a friend who is sick in the hospital, you would surely not take him a pizza or a
steak. You are most likely to take him fruit. If you happen to be in the wild, what would be the
first thing you would eat? Definitely fruit. (You remember even Adam ate an apple, although
we know what trouble that got him into!) Then would come roots, the killing of an animal,
cooking, and raising crops. Fruit is the most easily digestible food and all human beings
know this instinctively.
Most carnivorous animals do not eat every day -- definitely not three times a day! They
know the food they eat moves very slowly through their tracts. A tiger is said to eat once
every six to eight days. He is agile and prowls when he is hungry, eats a hefty meal of fifty-

five pounds of meat at once, and then generally sleeps or ambles around lazily. A cobra eats
sixty percent of its own body weight in a single meal, and eats only once every twelve to
fifteen days. The pygmies from the central African region used to hunt elephants, eat their
organs and meat raw, and drink the blood fresh. They say they would sleep after this kind of
meal for over forty hours at a stretch. But as lifestyles change and grow more urban and
sedentary, it is clear that human beings cannot maintain such a mode of life. You certainly
cannot afford this sort of lifestyle. You have to eat every day and rest at specific times because
your alimentary canal is similar to that of the herbivores.

THE PROTEIN DEBATE
There is much emphasis laid nowadays on eating protein. It is important to
understand that only three percent of our body is composed of protein and
excess protein consumption can cause cancer. Meat runs high in protein. A
very small portion of the meat that one consumes can fulfill the human protein
requirement. The remaining portion, which travels very slowly through the
alimentary canal, leads to a variety of problems such as excessive bacterial
activity, enhanced sleep quota, increased inertia levels in the body, and
decreased cellular regeneration. All of this, in turn, manifests as a drop in
one's sensitivity of perception. It is in this context that meat has been regarded
as spiritually unsupportive, because the spiritual process is essentially about
enhancing one's perception beyond the limitations of the physical.

Digestion Drama
Another aspect of digestion is that to digest a certain kind of food the human system produces
alkalis, and to digest another kind of food it generates acid. If you consume a jumble of
foods, then the stomach grows confused and produces both acids and alkalis, which neutralize
each other and make the digestive juices lose their edge. Hence the food remains in the
stomach longer than required, and weakens our ability to rejuvenate on the cellular level.
It also causes what we refer to as tamas, or inertia, in the energy system, which over a
period of time will alter the very quality of who you are and impair the quality of who you
could be. Traditionally, in southern India, people took care never to mix certain foods. But
today, food is no more about the well-being of the body, but a social affair. People eat out at
buffets and the variety and number of dishes served is considered more important than
nourishing the health and life of the body.
The question is not about what not to eat, but about how much of what to eat. It is not a
moral issue; it is a question of life sense. As you battle city life, you need an agile and
working mind, and physical and mental balance. And some of you even have spiritual
aspirations -- even if it is only every once in a while! So, every individual must arrive at his or
her own balance of diet, not by taking vows, but by observation and awareness.
It is important not to turn into a food freak. Food should never become an all-consuming
affair. Every creature on the planet knows what to eat and what not to. What is the human
problem then? The human problem is not enough attention, but too much information.
The yogic science works essentially with the interiority of the human being. Out of its
profound understanding of the science of the human mechanism, this science later branched
out into various systems. One such outcome was the system of Ayurveda, which is growing
increasingly popular once again in modern times. The word ayur means "life span" and the
word veda means "science" or "knowledge." So, Ayurveda is the science of extending the
human life span. It is a system that uses external plant life and earth elements to promote
health and to correct systemic irregularities. Knowledge systems like these were intended to
assist those who are incapable of doing the necessary yogic practice to achieve the same ends.
Sadhana
The consumption of a spoonful of clarified butter (ghee in India) on a daily basis a few minutes before a

meal does wonders for the digestive system. If you eat clarified butter with sugar, as in sweets, it is
digested and turns into fat. But clarified butter without sugar can cleanse, heal, and lubricate the alimentary
canal. Additionally, the cleansing of the colon will immediately manifest as a certain glow and aliveness
in your skin. Even those who prefer not to consume dairy products could experiment with this because
clarified butter passes through the system largely without getting digested.

EVOLUTIONARY CODE
If you must eat non-vegetarian food, the best would be fish. Firstly, it is easily
digestible with very high nutritional values. Secondly, it leaves the least
amount of its imprint upon you.
What is meant by this?
Our bodies -- all that we eat, excrete, and what eventually gets cremated or
buried -- is just earth. The software within your system determines that if you
eat a fruit it is transformed into the human body, and not into a monkey or a
mouse. The efficiency of your system obliterates the other software that
transformed soil into a fruit and arrives at a new software that will make a
fruit into a human form. For more evolved creatures, particularly mammals,
their software is more distinct and individuated. This makes it harder for your
code-breaking system to erase the software of the creature that you consume
and to overwrite it with a new software.
Among the animals, fish, being one of the earlier forms of life upon this
planet, have the easiest software code for our system to break and integrate
into ourselves. Animals that have more intelligence, particularly those that are
capable of a variety of emotions (such as cows or dogs), will retain their own
memory systems. In other words, we are incapable of completely integrating
more evolved, intelligent, and emotionally endowed creatures into our
systems.
In earlier times, in communities that were more in tune with the earth,
people could hunt and eat animals and work out the consequences through
enormous amounts of physical activity. But given the largely sedentary lives
people lead nowadays, the acidity produced by such a diet could contribute
greatly to the unexplained levels of stress that are being widely experienced
today. Additionally, large animals, particularly cows, are aware of their
impending slaughter well before it happens. Consequently, they experience
high stress levels, which generate a tremendous amount of acidic content in
their systems. This, in turn, has its own adverse impact on those who later
consume the meat.

Gastronomic Sense
If you observe the natural cycle of the body, you will find that there is something called a
mandala. A mandala is a cycle of forty to forty-eight days that the human system goes
through. In every cycle, there will be three days on which your body does not need food.
If you are conscious of how your body functions, you will become aware that on a
particular day the body does not require food. Without effort, you can go without food on that
day. Even dogs and cats have this awareness; on a particular day they often choose not to eat.
The day the system says "no food" is a cleanup day. Since most people are not aware of
which day their body should go without food, the day of Ekadashi was fixed in the Indian
calendar. Ekadashi is the eleventh day of the lunar segment and recurs every fourteen days. It
is traditionally regarded as the day to fast. If some people are unable to go without food
because their activity levels demand it, or if they do not have the appropriate spiritual practice
to support it, they can opt to go on a fruit diet.
If you force yourself to fast without preparing your body and mind sufficiently, you will
only cause damage to your health. But if your body, mind, and energy are properly prepared
with the necessary practices, then fasting can be of much benefit to you.
People who are constantly on nicotine and caffeine will find that fasting can become very
difficult. So before fasting, prepare the body by consuming the right kind of nourishment,
particularly high-water-content foods like fruits and vegetables. It may not be a good thing
for everybody to fast, but it has many benefits if it is done with proper understanding.
The entire aim and endeavor of yoga is to open up the cocoon of the physical body to the
larger sensory body where you experience everything as a part of you. Fasting is an extension
of this logic: it is a way of nourishing yourself without any active ingestion. It may be done as
a detoxification process nowadays, but this is the internal rationale. This is why every
spiritual tradition in the world has fixed a certain period of fasting for its adherents. In the
yogic tradition, the fasting period was fixed according to the lunar cycle. This is because your
ability to assimilate energy from water, air, and sunlight is greater on certain days of the lunar
cycle. In some religions, the fasting period was fixed in peak summer when the consumption
of water and sun by the human system would naturally be high.
My great-grandmother, a wonderful old woman, often considered eccentric by those who
didn't know any better, would frequently give away her food to ants and sparrows. Tears of
bliss would be streaming down her face as she did this. People around her kept saying, "Why
don't you eat, old woman?" She'd simply reply, "I am full." But all those advisers died a long
time before she did. She lived on and died at the incredible age of a hundred and thirteen!
My mother used to do this as well: every day before she ate her breakfast, she would take

one handful of it and go looking for ants to feed. Only then would she eat. This has been a
tradition among the womenfolk in many families. An ant is the smallest living entity you can
see around you, the most inconsequential organism you can think of. So, for that very reason,
you feed it first. You make an offering not to the gods, or other celestial creatures, but to the
smallest creature you know. This planet belongs as much to them as it belongs to you. You
understand that every creature on this planet has the same right to live as you have. This
awareness can help create a conducive atmosphere, mentally and physically, for
consciousness to grow.
Just a simple act like this loosens you from your identification with the physical body. As
you become less of a body, your awareness of the other dimensions of who you are naturally
becomes enhanced. When you are very hungry all your body wants to do is eat. Just wait for
two minutes; you will find that it will make a big difference. When you are very hungry, you
are the body. Give it a little space and suddenly you are not just a body.
Gautama the Buddha went to the extent of saying, "When you are badly in need of food, if
you give away your food to somebody else, you will become stronger." I am not going that
far with you; I am only saying, just wait a few minutes! It will definitely leave you stronger.
If you are very compulsive about food, it is good to miss one meal consciously. Try doing
this: on a day when you are particularly hungry and some of your favorite dishes are being
cooked, try skipping a meal. This is not to torture yourself; this is just to become free from
the torture chamber that your body can very easily become.
What kind of food you eat, how much you eat, how you eat, turning it from a compulsive
pattern into a conscious process: this is the essence of fasting.
Sadhana
Just experiment. Start with twenty-five percent natural, uncooked, or live food -- fruit or vegetables -- 
today, and slowly push it up to a hundred percent in about four or five days. Stay there for a day or two,
and again cut it down by ten percent and in another five days you will reach fifty percent raw food, fifty
percent cooked food. This is ideal for most people, who wish to be active for sixteen to eighteen hours a
day.
Remember, if you eat cooked food, it may take you fifteen minutes to eat a meal. If you eat raw food,
you take a little more time to eat the same quantum of food, because you have to chew a little more. But
the nature of the body is such that after fifteen minutes the body will tell you that your meal is over. So
people tend to eat much less and lose weight. All it takes is being a little more conscious of how much
you are eating.

Restlessness to Restfulness
The fact that you sleep at night makes some difference between your mornings and evenings.
What is making the difference is the level of relaxation that sleep brings. If you could remain
relaxed while performing all the activity of the day, you would be about the same in the
evening, in terms of energy and enthusiasm, as you were in the morning.
If you wake up fresh, that is a good beginning, but slowly through the day, as your
relaxation levels come down, you gradually start feeling stressed. Stress is not because of
work -- this is important to remember. Everybody thinks their job is stressful. No job is
stressful. There are many jobs that could present challenging situations. There could be nasty
bosses, insecure colleagues, emergency rooms, impossible deadlines -- or you might even
find yourself in the middle of a war zone! But these are not inherently stressful. It is our
compulsive reaction to the situations in which we are placed that causes stress. Stress is a
certain level of internal friction. One can easily lubricate the inner mechanism with some
amount of inner work and awareness. So, it is your inability to handle your own system that is
stressing you out. On some level, you do not know how to handle your body, mind, and
emotions; that is the problem.
How then do you keep your system free of stress so that you remain in the same level of
enthusiasm, relaxation, and happiness, whether it is morning or evening?
An average person's pulse rate on an empty stomach would be in the seventies or even
eighties. For a person doing the right type of meditative practice, you will find that the pulse
rate would range between the thirties and forties. Even after a good lunch it would stay in the
fifties. This is just one parameter that indicates the level of restfulness that your body is
experiencing moment to moment. Restfulness essentially defines the replenishing and
rejuvenating capability of the body.
You cannot slow down your system at the cost of activity. What is necessary is to keep your
system in such a way that activity does not take its toll upon it. Maybe physically you get
exhausted, but it need not stress you in any way. If you are capable of being vibrantly active
and still relaxed, then it is worthwhile. If you start certain simple practices of yoga, in three to
four months' time, your pulse rate will drop at least eight to twenty counts very easily. That
means the body is running so much more efficiently and at a relaxed pace.
What the body needs is not sleep but restfulness. If you keep the body very relaxed through
the day, your sleep quota will go down naturally. If your work and taking a walk or exercising
are also relaxation for you, your sleep quota will drop even further.
Right now, people want to do everything the hard way. I see people walking in the park in a
state of tension. Whether you walk or jog, why can't it be done easily, joyfully? This exercise
may be causing more harm to you than well-being because you are going at it as if you're

going into battle!
Don't battle with life. You are not anti-life; you are life. Just get in tune with it and you will
see that you will pass through it easily. Keeping yourself fit and well is not a battle. Do some
activity that you enjoy: play a game, swim, walk, run. If you don't like to do anything except
eat cheesecake all day, then you have a problem! Otherwise, there is no incompatibility
between being active and relaxed at the same time.
How much sleep does your body need? It depends on the level of physical activity you are
engaged in. There is no need to fix the quota of either food or sleep. To program the calories
you must consume and the number of hours you must sleep is a foolish way to handle life. Let
the body decide how much it should eat today, not you. Today your activity levels are low, so
you eat less. Tomorrow your activity is high, so you eat more. Similarly with sleep: when you
feel sufficiently relaxed you come awake. The moment the body is rested it will wake up -- 
whether it be at three or four or eight o'clock. When it comes to food and sleep, your body is
the best judge.
If the body is at a certain level of alertness and awareness you will see that once it is well
rested, it will awaken -- that is, if it is eager to come to life. If it is somehow trying to use the
bed as a grave, then it is a problem. Keep the body in such a way that it is not longing to avoid
or escape life. Maintain it in such a way that it is longing to come awake.
Sadhana
If you sleep without a pillow or with a very low pillow, which doesn't allow the spine to get pinched, the
neuronal regeneration of the brain and the cellular regeneration of the neurological system will be much
better. If you sleep without a pillow, it is best to lie on your back in a supine position, rather than on your
side. Lying in this position is referred to in yoga as shavasana: it enhances the purification and rejuvenation
of the body, promotes the free flow of movement in the energy system, bringing relaxation and vitality.
But there is no reason to get dogmatic about this. (At least in your sleep, don't take a position!)

Carnal to Cosmic
Existence is a dance between the unmanifest and the manifest. The moment there is a
manifestation, there is duality: light and darkness, male and female, birth and death, and so on.
Though unity is the basic fabric of creation, duality brings texture, design, and color to life.
All the various manifestations that you see as life today are fundamentally rooted in duality.
Because there are two, there are many. If there were only one, there would be no existence.
Once there are two, the game of life begins.
Once duality begins, sex begins. What we call sex is just two parts of this duality striving to
become one. In the process of these dualities meeting, there are also certain functions that
Nature wants to fulfill, like procreation and the survival of the species. All duality is striving
for unity because what was once one has manifested itself as two; now there is a perpetual
longing to become one.
This longing to become one finds expression in many ways. When you are young and your
intelligence is hijacked by your hormones, sex will be the way. When you are middle-aged
and your intelligence is hijacked by your emotions, love is the way. When you are old and
bereft of hormonal mischief, prayer is the way. But irrespective of age, when you transcend
all this and seek the same union on a much higher level of awareness, then yoga is the way.
If you are seeking oneness with the body, you need to remember that physical bodies will
always remain two, no matter what you do. For a few moments, a sense of unity will happen,
and then people fall apart. If divorce does not do it, death will. It is bound to happen.
Sex is just two opposites making an attempt to become one. Your individuality means not
only false boundaries that you have set up in your mental framework in the form of your
preferences and dislikes, tastes and opinions. It also means you are trapped within the
boundaries of your own physical body. You may not be consciously aware, but the life within
you is longing to break these boundaries. When you want to break your mental boundaries
you may long to have a serious conversation or read a book, drink alcohol, take a drug, or do
something freaky. To break your physical boundaries you may want to pierce yourself, get a
tattoo, dye your hair, or go the old-fashioned way of sex.
The intention of sex is great, but the method is hopeless. Pleasure is involved, so it drives
two people toward each other, but oneness comes only momentarily. So you try to meet in
other areas of emotion and intellect. People are always trying to find common ground: "We
like the same ice cream, both of us are blond, both of us play videogames, share the same
zodiac sign, and like the same TV shows…" But unless you understand that you can never
become one, you will not learn to enjoy the opposite.
These two energies, which in the human race we call "masculine" and "feminine," are
always trying to come together. At the same time, except for this longing to be together, they

are opposites. They are lovers and enemies at the same time. If they look for similarities,
there seems to be little common ground, but the attraction of the opposite is always there.
A lot of people cannot face the basic physical act as it is, so they have invented all kinds of
decorations around it to make it beautiful. You always add emotion to it, because without
emotion it would seem ugly. In some way you are trying to cloud your vision of reality with
lots of decorations.
Sex is natural; it is there in the body. Sexuality is something you invented; it is
psychological. If sex is in the body, it is fine, it is beautiful. The moment it enters your mind,
it becomes a perversion. It has no business with your mind. Sex is a small aspect of you, but
today it has become huge. For many, it has become life itself.
If you look at modern societies, I would say probably ninety percent of human energy is
being spent either pursuing or avoiding sex. Sex is just nature's trick to reproduce. If this
attraction of opposites did not exist, the species would become extinct. But now we have made
such a distinction between man and woman, almost as if they are two separate species. No
other creature on the planet has the kind of problems with sex that humans have. With animals,
the urge is present in their body at certain times; otherwise they are free from it. With humans
it is on their minds all the time.
One reason this has happened is that in the past, many religions went about denying a
simple physical process to the extent of making it sinful. Because we could not even accept the
biology of a human being, instead of looking beyond the limitations of the biological
process, we tried to deny it. If we had no problem with biology, we would not make a
distinction between who was who. Everybody would be known for what they are worth;
whether somebody is male or female would be irrelevant. The whole exploitation of women
starts once you cannot accept the fundamental differences between a man and a woman.
You do not have to make biology sacred, nor do you have to make it filthy. It is the
instrument of life. Because of it you exist. If you know how to live it without elevating it or
making it ugly, it has a beauty of its own.
The sensuousness that you experience in life is a chemical invitation for something that is
not you to become a part of you. This is Nature's way of instigating you toward a union, or
yoga. Though sensuousness is celebratory in its nature, it is discriminatory too. When two
individuals are in a passionate meeting, the rest of the world is excluded, or even obliterated.
If the celebration has to last, your sensuousness or your passion has to become all-inclusive.
If you are in a state of all-inclusive passion, we call this yoga. So, denial is not the answer.
Expansion is the only answer.
And if you have not known the sensuousness of the life-giving breath that is on every
moment of your life, how can you even begin to know any other kind? Experiencing the
orgasmic nature of the breathing process is called ana pana sati yoga, the yoga of incoming
and outgoing breath. Ana pana literally means "in" and "out." Sati means "female consort."
So, the reference here is clearly to orgasmic union. And so, ana pana sati yoga is a process
that initiates you into a conscious and profound involvement with your breath, and shows you
how the simple incoming and outgoing breath can become a source of nameless ecstasies.

Sadhana
The higher possibilities of life are housed in the human body. The physical body is a platform for all
possibilities from the gross to the sacred. You can perform simple acts of eating, sleeping, and sex as acts
of grossness, or you can bring a certain dimension of sanctity to all these aspects. This sanctity can be
achieved by bringing subtler thought, emotion, and intention into these acts. Above all, remember that the
grossness and sanctity of something is largely decided by your unwillingness and unconsciousness, or
your willingness and consciousness. Every breath, every step, every simple act, thought, and emotion can
acquire the stance of the sacred if conducted recognizing the sanctity of the other involved -- whether a
person or a foodstuff or an object that you use.
Of all the loving acts that two human beings are capable of, the simple act of holding hands can often
become the most intimate. Why is this so? Basically, because the nature of the hands and feet is such that
the energy system finds expression in these two parts of the body in a very singular way. Two palms
coming together have far more intimacy than the contact between any other parts of the body.
You can try this with yourself. You don't even need a partner. When you put your hands together, the
two energy dimensions within you (right-left, masculine-feminine, solar-lunar, yin-yang, etc.) are linked in
a certain way, and you begin to experience a sense of unity within yourself. This is the logic of the
traditional Indian namaskar. It is a means of harmonizing the system.
So, the simplest way to experience a state of union is to try this simple namaskar yoga. Put your hands
together, and pay loving attention to any object you use or consume, or any form of life that you
encounter. When you bring this sense of awareness into every simple act, your experience of life will
never be the same again. There is even a possibility that if you put your hands together, you could unite the
world!

Hormonal Hijack
I was once asked, "Isn't it strange that people are more obsessed with sex than any other
physical urge?" Nothing strange about it. It is just the hormonal hijack we talked about earlier.
In any case, sex is not the most powerful urge. Hunger is.
Most of the time, thinking about sex is just compulsive behavior. When you were a child, it
did not matter what reproductive organs someone had. The moment the hormones started
playing within you, you could not think of the world beyond that. And you will see that after a
certain age, when the play of hormones subsides, once again it will not matter. You will look
back and not believe you were the one obsessing about it.
There is nothing wrong with the body; it is just limited. Nothing wrong with being limited
either. If you go by the way of the body, some pleasure may come to you. It is not a crime to
want to be limited, but you will live an unfulfilled life.
Let us say tomorrow I grant you a boon and all the women or men in the world are lusting
after you. You will find that you are still not satisfied. A little bit of pleasure and pain will
happen, but you will only live within the sphere of the body. The body knows only survival
and procreation. And it is walking straight to the grave every moment, nowhere else.
Your body is just a loan from this planet. What you call "death" is just Mother Earth
reclaiming the loan that she offered to you. All life on this planet is just a recycle of the Earth.
You may think right now that you are going to your office, home, or football match, but as
far as your body is concerned, it is going, moment by moment, straight toward the grave.
Right now, you may have forgotten, but slowly, as time passes, it will become more apparent
that this is the nature of the body. If all that you have known is the body -- and anyway you are
going to lose it -- anxiety and fear will be your constant companions.
People are even beginning to think that fear is a natural part of their existence. No. Fear is a
result of the incompleteness of your existence. If you have not explored life in its magnitude
and multidimensionality, but have limited yourself to the physical body, fear is a natural
consequence.
Ever heard of George Best? He was one of the greatest footballers of his time in England.
He was determined to make the most of his life in the way he knew best. The media described
him as having every popular film star and fashion model on his arm at some time or the
other. But by the time he reached the age of thirty-five, he was a broken, miserable, frustrated
man; by the age of fifty-nine, he was dead. Death is not the issue, but the way you live is the
issue. George Best supposedly had it all but he lived a terrible life.
This is because the way of the physical is circumscribed. The body has only so much of a
role to play in your life. If you try to stretch it to all of your life, you will suffer because you
are trying to create a falsehood. Life has a million ingenious ways to bend you, break you,

knead you, and grind you.
Nothing wrong with your hormones, but once you live a compulsive life, you are living the
life of a slave. Everything may be going on fine with your life -- your business, family,
relationships -- but slowly, as different kinds of compulsions take over, you grow more and
more miserable. There is something within you that is unwilling to be a slave. For many, the
pursuit of wealth and physical well-being drives them to increasingly desperate actions. If you
look under the veneer of civilization you will uncover the most abominable forms of abuse.
We are not even sparing our own children. These are the consequences of not attending to all
the dimensions of being human, and limiting ourselves to the narrow realm of the physical.
Today, in attempting to fetishize the body, people are creating untold suffering. You cannot
think of a better arrangement materially: in terms of healthcare, insurance, cars. You have
more comforts and conveniences than any previous generation. But people are suffering
immensely. In affluent societies almost every fifth person is on some kind of medication just
to maintain mental balance. When you have to take a tablet every day to remain sane, this is
not joyfulness. You are on the verge of breaking down because you have made a small aspect
of your life the whole of your life.

MORTALITY AND PROFUNDITY
Only when you recognize your mortal nature do you want to know what more
there is to life. It is then that the spiritual process opens up.
Once it happened…Two men over eighty years of age met. One recognized
the other and said, "Did you fight in World War II?"
The other man said, "Yes."
The first asked him where, and with which battalion. The other man told
him.
The first exclaimed, "Oh, my God! Don't you recognize me? We were in
the same foxhole!"
Oh, they hit it off! They talked and talked. All that they had actually seen was
about forty minutes of an intense combat situation. But they talked about every
bullet that went by, zing, zing, just missing them by inches. They spoke for
over four hours about those forty minutes.
When they had exhausted everything that they could say about that time, one
asked the other, "What have you been doing since the war?"
"Oh, for the past sixty years, I've just been a salesman."
Those forty minutes had come to define their lives because their mortality
was dangling in front of them at every moment. In battle they had forged a
bond that was profound. Beyond that, this man's life could be summed up in a
single sentence: he was just a salesman.
You discover an indescribable profundity within yourself when you realize
your mortal nature. If you have not realized your eternal nature you must at
least realize your mortal nature. Death is not the end of life. Death is simply
the end of the body. If you have lived with a very deep identification with the
physical, the more you will struggle with death, because death marks the end
of the body. Only when you confront your mortality -- the potential but
inevitable termination of your physical form -- does the longing to go beyond
become genuine.

Miracle or Mess?
Once it happened…A man wished to acquire supernatural powers. He went from one guru to
another, desperately in search of instruction. He eventually found his way to a remote
hermitage in the Himalayan wilderness.
The guru of the ashram divined the purpose of his quest and tried to dissuade him. "What
will you do with these powers? So what if you learn to walk upon the water? After three days,
a boat will be better! Don't waste your life on these irrelevant pursuits. Let me teach you
meditation instead." The master made many attempts to dissuade him, but the man was
adamant.
The guru finally said, "Well, if you're so determined, take a dip in the river tomorrow
morning at four o'clock and come to me. I will initiate you into the secrets of the
supernatural."
The man was excited. He took a pre-dawn dip in a freezing Himalayan river, turned half
blue, and came and sat expectantly before the master.
The guru said, "See, this is very simple. I have a secret mantra. If you utter it three times
over for the next forty days, all the supernatural powers will be yours."
He then revealed the mantra:
Asatoma sadgamaya.
From ignorance, lead me to truth.
The guru said, "You have to repeat this sacred mantra three times a day for the next forty
days and the entire realm of the supernatural will be yours. But when uttering the mantra, just
don't think of monkeys."
The man was incredulous at the simplicity of the practice. "Is that all?" he asked joyfully.
"May I leave now?"
The guru said, "By all means. Please go and return in forty days."
The man left in a state of great excitement. "The fool of a guru revealed all his secrets to
me without even charging a fee!" he thought. "And he is telling me not to think of monkeys.
Why would I think of monkeys? Ridiculous!"
He came down the mountainside and reached the banks of the river Ganga. He took a dip in
the holy river and sat down to begin his practice. But no sooner had he uttered the word
"asatoma" -- and monkeys! Each time a monkey popped into his head, he took another dip in
the river. He attempted the mantra in various yogic postures. But each time he uttered the very
first syllable, monkeys would appear. In hordes. In one week of intense practice, there was no
need of a mantra anymore. It was a universe full of monkeys -- a simian nightmare. Harassed
by these countless monkeys, unable to do a thing, the man went all the way back to the guru

and said, "I don't want your damn supernatural powers. Relieve me of these monkeys first!"
If you tell yourself you don't want to think a certain thought, that is precisely the first thing
your mind will produce! That is the nature of the human mind.
In recent times, much scientific research has been conducted on the activity of the brain. If
you look at the way neurons fire in the brain, there is a tremendous cohesiveness in this
activity. It is this cohesiveness that translates into the efficient functioning of the body. A
billion sophisticated activities are being performed in your body right now because of the
highly coordinated and complex dance of neurons.
But the mind, in most people's experience, has unfortunately become a circus. A circus is
actually a very coordinated activity, deliberately made to look like a mess. Even the clown in
the circus is a gymnast. He may play the buffoon, but he is hugely talented and skillful in what
he does. The metaphor of the clown sums up the experience of most people when it comes to
their mental activity.
How did the mind, that amazing gymnast, become a clown? How did it turn from a source
of magic to such a mess? Why has this miraculous instrument become such a misery-
manufacturing machine?
As noted earlier, every human being is essentially seeking pleasantness, within and without.
When it comes to the outside, there are a million ingredients, and nobody has complete
mastery over them. When it comes to the inner situation, however, there is only one
ingredient: you. You can be the sole architect and creator of your inner life. But you don't
know how. That is the rub. If you were in charge, for sure you would not manufacture misery
for yourself. A fundamental freedom you have is to think whatever you want. What then stops
you from thinking pleasant thoughts?
The problem is just this: the fact that your mind is not taking instructions from you.
Imagine a Paleolithic caveman punching a computer keyboard. What's going to come up on
screen will look like a series of obscenities!
The system of yoga is a technology to create a distinction between you and your mind.
There is a space between you and what you have gathered in terms of body and mind.
Becoming conscious of this space is your first and only step to freedom. It is the accumulated
physiological and psychological content that causes the cyclical patterns in your life and even
beyond. If you can be constantly conscious of this space between you and the body-mind, you
have opened up a dimension of limitless possibility.
There are only two forms of suffering in this world: physical and mental. Once this
distance becomes a constant factor in your experience, you have reached the end of suffering.
With the elimination of the fear of suffering, you can walk life full stride, unafraid to explore
all that life has to offer. Your ability to use this immensely sophisticated body-mind
phenomenon can be raised to a completely new dimension of experience and utility as you
stand outside of them. This sounds paradoxical, but it is true. As the experience of space
grows, the mind is no more a mess. It is a great symphony, a tremendous possibility that can
take you to great heights.
Yoga is a journey toward a reality in which you experience the ultimate nature of existence

as borderless unity. This experience is possible only if you maintain that space between you
and your body-mind. It is important to remember that this borderless unity is an experience,
not an idea, philosophy, or concept. If you vouch for the oneness of the universe as an
intellectual theory, this may make you popular at a dinner party or win you applause at a
seminar. You may even get a Nobel Prize. But it does not serve any other purpose. The
experience of borderless unity, on the other hand, can deliver you to another dimension
altogether -- a dimension of love and blissfulness, a dimension far beyond the cerebral.
It can actually be damaging to an individual to see everything as one, intellectually. People
often profess all kinds of fancy philosophical theories about becoming one with the cosmos,
about loving the entire world, until life teaches them a good lesson. When it comes to money,
the boundary between self and other is abundantly clear. At such times, there is no question of
you and me being one!
Once it happened…Shankaran Pillai went to a Vedanta class. Vedanta is the school of Indian
metaphysics that speaks of the non-duality of the self and the divine. The teacher, a learned
philosopher, was in full swing: "You are not just this or that; you are everywhere. There is
nothing like 'yours' and 'mine'; everything is you, everything is yours. In essence, everything
is one. What you see, hear, smell, taste, touch is not reality; it is all maya, all illusion."
This unbeatable Vedanta rhetoric was buzzing in Shankaran Pillai's head. He went home
and slept on it. He woke in the morning, totally fired up. Usually he loved to sleep, but
because of this Vedanta, he sprang out of bed. The first thoughts in his mind were, "There is
nothing which is not mine. Everything is mine; everything is me. All that is in this world is
me, and everything is maya."
You know, whatever the philosophy may be, hunger happens at regular intervals. So
Shankaran Pillai went to his favorite restaurant, ordered a big breakfast, and devoured it,
saying to himself, "The food is me; the one who serves is also me; the one who eats is also
me." Vedanta!
He finished his breakfast. When he was in such a high state of Vedanta, mundane issues like
paying the bill did not occur to him. He rose and started walking out. When everything is
yours, how can there be a bill?
As he passed the cash counter, the owner happened to turn away to attend to some other
chore. Shankaran Pillai saw a huge heap of currency in the till. Immediately, Vedanta told him,
"Everything is yours; you cannot differentiate between this and that." So because his pockets
were quite empty, he put his hand into the box, took some cash, stuffed it in his pocket, and
sauntered out of the restaurant. He was not out to rob anybody; he was just practicing Vedanta.
Suddenly a few people from the restaurant ran up and caught him. Shankaran Pillai said,
"Who are you trying to catch? You are the catcher and the caught; what you catch is you; the
one that catches is also you. When there is no such thing as you and me, who can I pay?"
The owner was bewildered! Only one thing was clear to him: "My cash is in your pocket."
But here was Shankaran Pillai saying, "The one who catches is also me, the one who is caught
is also me." The owner didn't know how to deal with this kind of customer. At his wits' end,
he took Shankaran Pillai to court.

There, Shankaran Pillai continued his Vedanta. The judge tried in many ways to make him
understand that he had committed a theft, but to no avail. Then the judge gave up and said,
"Okay, ten lashes on the backside."
First lash…Shankaran Pillai screamed.
The judge said, "Don't worry. It's all maya anyway. There is no such thing as pain and
pleasure. Everything is maya."
Second lash…Shankaran Pillai shouted, "Enough!"
The judge said, "The one who lashes is you, the one who is lashed is also you."
Third lash…Shankaran Pillai hollered, "Stop stop!"
"There is no such thing as starting and stopping. It is all maya."
It was like this all the way to ten lashes. But before the ten were done, Vedanta had been
cleaned right out of Shankaran Pillai.
An intellectual understanding that is not backed by experiential knowledge can lead to mind
games and deceptive states. But if oneness becomes an experiential reality, it will not produce
an immature action. It will produce a tremendous experience of life that will leave you
transformed forever.
Universality is not an idea; it is an existential truth. It is individuality that is an idea. Yoga is
simply chitta vritti nirodha. That means, if the activity of your mind ceases and you are still
alert, you are in yoga.
But don't try to forcibly stop the mental activity because you will go insane. With your
mind, all the three pedals are throttles; there are no brakes and no clutch. Have you noticed
this? Whatever pedal you hit, the mind only accelerates its speed. But if you don't pay any
attention to it, thoughts will slowly subside, leaving you in a rich and vibrant silence.
Sadhana
Remind yourself at least once an hour that everything you're carrying -- your handbag, your money, your
relationships, the heaviness in your heart and body -- are things that you've accumulated over a period of
time. If you become more and more conscious of this fundamental fact even as a process of dis-
identification grows within you -- balanced by a deep sense of involvement in everything around you -- you
will move from the misery and madness of the human mind toward meditativeness.

Thinking Yourself Out of Life
It is only because you exist that you can generate a thought. But your thought process has
become so compulsive that your focus has shifted from the existential to the psychological.
This has happened to such an extent that you have begun to believe that you exist because you
think! The foundations of Western philosophy actually rest on the famous axiom by the
seventeenth-century French philosopher René Descartes: "I think, therefore I am."
It is time to restate a fundamental fact: you are, therefore you may think. This has nothing to
do with any philosophy, Eastern or Western. It is a simple existential reality.
You can "be," and still choose to think or not think. The most beautiful moments in your
life -- what you might consider moments of bliss, joy, ecstasy, or utter peace -- were moments
when you were not thinking about anything at all. You were just being. Even without your
thoughts, existence is.
What are thoughts really? Just information that you have gathered and recycled. Are you
really capable of thinking of anything other than what has been accumulated by your mind?
All the human mind is doing is recycling old data.
So I ask: Do you want to be a living being or a thinking being? Right now, ninety percent of
the time, you are only thinking about life, not living it. Have you come into this world to
experience life or to think about it? Your mental process is a very small happening compared
to the life process, but right now it has become far more important. It is time for humanity to
shift the significance to the life process once again. The need is an urgent one. Our lives
depend on it.
Once it happened…(This is almost certainly an apocryphal tale, but that doesn't matter; it
smells true.) Aristotle, the father of modern logic, the intellectual giant of ancient Greece, was
walking on the beach. A glorious sunset was before him, but he had no time for such petty
occurrences. He was thinking seriously about some great problem of existence. For the
intellectual mind, existence is always a problem, and Aristotle was out to solve it. Lost in
solemn thought, he paced up and down the beach.
There was another man on the beach who was doing something very intensely -- so
intensely that after a while even Aristotle noticed him. Those who are immersed in their own
psychological realities usually end up ignoring life around them. They seldom have the eyes
to look at a flower, a sunset, a child, or a smiling face. And if it is an unsmiling face, they
have no inclination to make it smile; they have no such small duties or minor cares in the
world! They are too busy cracking the great puzzles of existence.
But this man's intensity was such that even Aristotle could not ignore him. On close
observation he noticed that this man kept going to the ocean and returning, with great single-
mindedness of purpose. Aristotle paused in his reflections to inquire, "What exactly are you

up to?"
The man said, "Please don't disturb me, I am doing something very important." He
continued with his work with furious intensity.
Aristotle's curiosity was piqued. He asked again, "But what are you doing?"
The man said, "Don't disturb me. It is very important."
Aristotle said, "What is this important thing?"
The man showed him a little hole he had dug in the sand, and said, "I am emptying the
ocean into this hole." He had a tablespoon in his hand.
Aristotle looked at this and laughed. Now, Aristotle is the kind who can spend a whole year
without a single chuckle. It takes a heart to laugh. The intellect cannot laugh; it can only
dissect.
But even Aristotle laughed at this and said, "This is ridiculous! You must be insane. Do you
know how vast this ocean is? How can you ever empty this ocean into this little hole? And
above all, with a tablespoon? At least if you had a bucket, you might have stood some chance!
Please give this up. This is utter madness."
The man looked at Aristotle, threw the spoon down, and said, "My job is already done."
Aristotle said, "What do you mean? Forget about the ocean being empty; even the hole is
not full. How is your job done?"
The other man stood up and said, "I am trying to empty the ocean into this hole with a
tablespoon. You are telling me it is madness. But what are you trying to do? Do you know how
vast this existence is? It can contain a billion oceans like this and more, and you are trying to
empty it into the small hole of your head -- and with what? With tablespoons called thoughts!
Please give it up. It's utterly ridiculous."
The other man was Heraclitus, the other great Greek philosopher. In a flash, he showed
Aristotle what a crippled existence he was leading by attempting to extend his logic to every
aspect of life.
If you want to know the experiential dimensions of life, you will never know them with the
petty process of thought. Even if you have the brain of an Einstein, your thought process is
still outclassed because thought cannot be bigger than life. Thought can only be logical,
functioning between two polarities. If you want to know life in its immensity, you need
something more than the intellect.
This is the fundamental choice you have: either you learn to live with creation, or you
manufacture your own creation in your head.
Which option do you want to exercise?
The planet is spinning on time: not a small event. All the galaxies are managing fine; the
whole cosmos is doing great. But you have one nasty little thought crawling through your
head, and it is a bad day! The problem is you are living in a psychological space that bears no
connection with reality. And you are insecure, because it can collapse at any moment.
In the vastness and grandeur of cosmic space, if you look at yourself in perspective, you
are less than a speck of dust. But you think your thought -- which is less than a speck within

you -- should determine the nature of existence! You have lost your perspective of life: that is
the basic problem.
You have heard of the "Buddha." His name was Siddhartha Gautama, and he became a
Buddha. But Gautama was not the only Buddha. A human being who has transcended his
intellect, the discriminatory and logical dimensions of his life, is a Buddha. Human beings
have invented millions of ways to suffer. For all this the manufacturing unit is just in your
mind. Once you are no longer identified with your mind, you are free to experience life
beyond limitations. Being a Buddha means that you have become a witness to your own
intellect.
The essence of yoga, as we have said before, is just this -- to arrive at that moment where
there is a clear space between you and your mind. Once this happens, a life of heightened
clarity, perception, and freedom has begun. This is the birth of freedom.

LIMITS OF LOGIC
Without logical thinking, you couldn't survive on this planet. But at the same
time, too much logic is suicide. Let us say you wake up tomorrow morning
and start thinking a hundred percent logically. Do not think about the sunrise,
the birds in the sky, your child's face, the flowers blooming in your garden.
Just think logically. Now, you have to get up, go to the toilet, brush your teeth,
eat, work, eat, work, eat, sleep. Again, tomorrow morning the same thing. For
the next thirty, forty, or fifty years, you have to do the same thing. If you think
a hundred percent logically, there is no reason for you to be alive!
One day in New York City, a man was walking home, late from work.
Suddenly he had a romantic idea. He went to the florist, bought a huge bunch
of red roses, went home, and knocked on the door. His wife opened the door.
She looked at him and started hollering. "Today has been a terrible day. The
faucet has been leaking, the basement is flooded, the children had a food fight,
and I had to clean the whole place, the dog has been sick, my mother is not
well, and you have the cheek to come home drunk!"
So if you think a hundred percent logically, there is really no possibility of
life! Moments of extreme logic are moments of suicide. Only if you know
when logic should be used and when it's necessary to go beyond it, will your
life be beautiful.

Sadhana
You could try this simple practice. Set your tap in such a way that only five to ten drops fall per minute.
See if you can observe each drop -- how it forms, how it falls, how it splashes on the ground. Do this for
fifteen to twenty minutes a day. You will gradually become conscious of many things around and within
you that you are completely unaware of right now. This simple exercise can initiate a process of
sensitization and clarity and accomplish much more than you can possibly imagine. In this simple process,
you are actually exploring one limb of yoga referred to as dharana, which means "that which flows." It is
not the water we are referring to here. It is your attention, and, in turn, your consciousness. The attempt is
to make your attention flow and connect with its object -- in this case, water. This is not an exercise in
observation or appreciation. It is an exercise in attention -- in turning what is sporadic and intermittent into a
flow. (In the larger scheme of things, the water and you are already one. Your individuality is only your
idea.)

The Grime of Identity
The intellect is like a scalpel. Its function is to slice through reality and enable you to discern
one thing from another. If a knife has to cut through anything effortlessly, it is important that
the substance it encounters does not stick to it. A sticky knife is obviously an ineffective
implement.
Suppose you use a knife to cut a cake today; tomorrow you cut meat; and the day after
tomorrow you cut fruit. If all these residues were to stick to the knife, it would turn over time
into a useless instrument. You've probably experienced this already: if you cut mangoes or
apples after cutting an onion, everything tastes like onion! Such a knife becomes more of a
hindrance than a help. In other words, once your intellect gets identified with something, it
gets chained to the identifications, and leaves you with a completely distorted experience of
the world.
Once it happened…For political reasons, Akbar, the great emperor, was separated in his
infancy from his mother. Another woman who had a child of her own was brought in to nurse
him. This woman breastfed Akbar, and was later offered a reward for her services. Her boy,
who was still a child, slightly older than Akbar, was allotted a few villages and was made a
small ruler. Many years later, Akbar was crowned emperor. But this boy, who lacked the
intelligence and capability required of a ruler, squandered all his resources, lost all that was
given to him, and grew impoverished.
One day, when he was about thirty-two years of age, a grand idea occurred to him. He
thought, "Since the emperor and I drank the same mother's milk, we are brothers. And since I
was born first, I am the elder brother!"
With this idea planted firmly in his head, he went to Akbar and told him the same story.
"See, we are brothers, and I am elder to you. But look at my sorry state: I am poor, you are an
emperor! How can you leave me like this?"
Akbar was deeply moved. He welcomed him, set him up in the palace, and treated him like a
king. The man was not accustomed to the ways of the court, and committed many stupid
blunders. But the generous Akbar kept saying, "He is my elder brother. We have drunk the
milk of the same mother." He introduced him to everybody as his elder brother.
This was the state of affairs for some time. Then it was time for the man to return to his
village for some work. Akbar said, "My brother, you lost those villages given to you. I shall
give you five new villages to rule -- a small kingdom of your own."
The man said, "But I see that you have become this successful because there are lots of
smart people around you. I don't have anybody to advise me, and that is why I'm lost. If only I
had good advisers and ministers, I would also have built a major empire. Above all, you have
Birbal! He's so smart. If only I had somebody like him I would also be a great emperor."

The large-hearted Akbar said, "If you wish, you may take Birbal with you."
He summoned Birbal and ordered him, "You must go with my elder brother."
Birbal said, "Your Highness, your elder brother deserves someone better than me. Why not
my elder brother? I could send him instead."
Akbar thought that was a great idea because he did not relish the prospect of losing Birbal.
Delighted, he said, "Summon him immediately."
The next day this man was to leave for his new kingdom, and a grand farewell was
organized in court. There was a mood of anticipation in the air, as everyone waited for Birbal
to arrive with his elder brother.
Finally, Birbal entered with a bull in tow.
"What is this?" Akbar asked.
Birbal said, "This is my elder brother."
Akbar was furious. "Are you trying to insult me and my brother?"
"No, my lord," said Birbal. "He is my elder brother. Both of us drank milk from the same
mother."
Once your intellect -- or buddhi, as it is termed in the yogic taxonomy -- gets identified with
something, you function within the realm of this identity. Whatever you are identified with, all
your thoughts and emotions spring from that identity. Right now suppose you identify
yourself as a man, all your thoughts and emotions flow from that identification. If you
identify yourself with your nationality or religion, they will flow from those identifications.
Whatever your thoughts and emotions, these identifications are a certain level of prejudice. In
fact, your mind is itself a certain kind of prejudice. Why? Because it functions from limited
data and is fronted by an essentially discriminatory intellect. So, your mind, which should
have been a ladder to the divine, is stumbling through endless mediocrity and, on some
occasions, has become a straight stairway to hell.
The identity around which the intellect functions is called ahankara. To continue with the
earlier knife analogy, the hand that wields the knife is identity. Or in other words, it is your
identity that manages and determines your intellect. When you use a knife, it is important not
just to have a sharp blade, but a stable hand to hold it. Without a stable hand you can end up
cutting yourself in a million different ways. Most of the suffering human beings undergo is
not because of external situations. What is inflicted on them from the outside is minimal; the
rest is all self-help!
Once you are identified with something that you are not, the mind is an express train that
cannot be stopped. If you put the mind on full steam and want to apply the brakes, it will not
work. But if you are able to disentangle yourself from everything that you are not -- if you
dis-identify, as it were -- you will see that the mind turns just blank and empty. When you want
to use it, you can; at other times, it will simply be empty, devoid of all psychological clutter.
That is how it should be. But right now, you are identified with so many labels, and at the
same time you are trying to stop your mind: this will simply not work.
Irrespective of what you think you are, when death confronts you, every identification falls

away. If human beings learned to drop these voluntarily, life would be blissful. If you do not
encumber your intellect with any identifications -- body, gender, family, qualifications,
society, race, caste, creed, community, nation, even species -- you travel naturally toward your
ultimate nature. If not, death will demolish it all anyway. You need have no doubt about that!
If you employ your intelligence and make an attempt to reach your ultimate nature, this is
called gnana yoga, or the yoga of knowing. Gnana yogis cannot afford to identify themselves
with anything. If they do, that is the end of their journey. But unfortunately, what has happened
to gnana yoga, at least in India, is that its proponents entertain several beliefs. "I am the
Universal Soul, the Absolute, the Supreme Being" -- they know it all, from the arrangement of
the cosmos to the shape and size of the soul! They have read all these things in a book. This is
not gnana yoga. Any information you have about that which is not a living experience for
you, is irrelevance. Maybe it is very holy irrelevance, but it does not liberate you; it only
entangles you!
On a certain day, a bull was grazing on a field. He went deep into the forest, and after weeks
of grazing on lush grass, became nice and fat. A lion, who was past his prime and having
difficulty hunting his prey, saw this nice fat bull, pounced on him, killed him, and ate him up.
His stomach became full. Then with great satisfaction, he roared. A few hunters were passing
by. They heard the roar, tracked him down, and shot him dead.
Moral of the story: when you are so full of bull you should not open your mouth.
Very few people have the necessary intellect to pursue gnana yoga one hundred percent.
Most need a huge amount of preparation. There is an entire yogic process to make your
intellect so razor-sharp that it does not stick to anything. But it is very time-consuming
because the mind is a tricky customer; it is capable of creating a million illusions. Gnana
yoga as a part of your spiritual pursuit is a workable proposition; as an exclusive path, it is
only for a very rare few.
Sadhana
Just sit alone for an hour. No reading, no television, no phone, no communication, nothing. Just see in the
course of this hour what thoughts dominate your mind -- whether it is food, sex, your car, your furniture,
your jewelry, or anything else. If you find yourself thinking recurrently about people or things, your
identification is essentially with your body. If your thoughts are about what you would like to do in the
world, your identification is essentially with your mind. Everything else is just a complex set of offshoots
of these two aspects. This is not a value judgment. It is just a way of knowing what stage of life you're at.
How quickly you want to evolve depends on your own choices.

Soak the Intellect in Awareness
In the yogic system of classification, the mind has sixteen dimensions. These sixteen fall into
four categories. There is the discerning, or discriminatory, dimension of the mind or the
intellect (buddhi); the accumulative dimension of the mind, or memory (manas), which
gathers information; and what is called awareness (chitta), which is beyond both intellect and
memory. The fourth dimension, ahankara, we discussed earlier -- the aspect of the mind from
which you derive your sense of identity.
The first dimension -- the intellect, buddhi -- is crucial for your survival. You are able to
discern a person from a tree only because your intellect is functional. You know that you must
walk through the door, not through the wall, only because your intellect is functional. Without
this dimension of discernment, you would not know how to survive on this planet. On more
complex and sophisticated levels, the intellect has contributed immeasurably to human culture
and civilization.
The problem of our times, however, is that the intellect has taken on a disproportionately
important role. Modern education has encouraged a completely lopsided development of this
aspect of the mind. The essence of the intellect is to divide. So humanity has embarked on a
journey of wholesale division, discrimination, and dissection. We have split everything. Even
the invisible atom has been split.
Once you unleash the intellect, it splits everything it encounters; it does not allow you to be
with anything totally. Although it is a wonderful instrument for survival, it is also at the same
time a terrible barrier that stands between you and your experience of the oneness of life.
How do we address this problem?
Yoga offers us a way. In our times, it is not just a useful strategy; it is perhaps our only
chance of reversing a journey that seems to be taking us headlong toward self-destruction.
The intellect is becoming a barrier because you keep it constantly dipped in the
accumulative part of the mind -- your memory, manas. Examine this for yourself. You will
find that every thought that arises in the mind has its roots in data you have already
accumulated. The data may be gathered consciously or unconsciously. In any case, this
basically means your intellect is perpetually immersed in the past. In such a state, nothing new
is now possible. And so, the intellect loses its edge and becomes a trap.
The accumulative part of the mind is, to put it simply, just society's garbage bin. It is
merely a heap of impressions you have gathered from outside. Anybody you encounter stuffs
something into your head and moves on: your parents, teachers, friends, enemies, preachers,
the news anchor on TV, just about everyone. You have no choice about who to receive from
and who not to receive from. The moment you say "I don't like this person," you often end up
receiving much more from him or her than anybody else! You have the ability to process the

information you receive, but that is all. Your ability to merely recycle the garbage you have
picked up is what the mighty intellect has been reduced to.
The blitzkrieg of information that your mind receives daily enters you only through your
five sense organs. Your sense organs, as we have seen before, always perceive everything
only in comparison. Where there is comparison, there is always duality. Suppose I were to
show you my hand. While you are able to see one side, you cannot see the other. If I were to
show you the other side, you would not be able to perceive this first side. Human perception
through the sense organs is always piecemeal. It can give you an illusion of completeness but
can never comprehend the whole.
When you keep your intellect dipped in this limited, fragmented, accumulative dimension
of your mind, you draw conclusions about life that are completely distorted. The more people
become engrossed in thought, the more joyless they become. It is unfortunate. But let me be
clear: thought in itself is not a problem. People who think with clarity should be joyful.
Unfortunately, for many people, the more they think, the more incapable they become of
smiling! The problem is just that they have enslaved their faculty of discernment to the
limitations of their sense perception.
But the same intellect can be sharpened if you allow it to soak in the other aspect of your
mind -- your awareness, chitta. If you want to reach your ultimate nature through the mind,
you need to make the intellect truly discriminatory, in the ultimate sense. This does not mean
dividing everything into good and bad, right and wrong, high and low, heaven and hell,
sacred and profane. Instead, all it means is learning to discern the real from the illusory, what
is existentially true from what is psychologically true.
If you soak your intellect in your awareness, the discerning dimension of your mind can
turn into a miraculous tool of liberation. It can become razor-sharp, slice through what is true
and untrue, and deliver you to a different dimension of life altogether.
Learn to place your intellect in the sheath of your awareness rather than in the sack of
memory and identification. Once you do, this tremendous instrument can cut its way
effortlessly toward the ultimate.
Sadhana
If you consciously walk a tightrope, you have no choice but to be aware. If your intellect is constantly
choosing between good and bad, it has become a prejudiced intellect. And when it is busy sorting the
world into good and bad, you will most definitely fall off the tightrope. Don't take the tightrope literally.
You could just try bringing a certain precision into the physical movements of the body. (If you have a
hatha yoga practice, it should happen anyway.) For instance, if you see a straight line on the floor, try
walking in perfect alignment with that line, maintaining an easy gait. This is not about becoming self-
conscious, but about becoming precise or exact. Try this with your body and see. Bring precision into every
movement, every gesture. This is one way of dipping your intellect in awareness.

Awareness Is Aliveness
What do we mean by the word "awareness," anyway? What does it signify? And how can we
access it?
First and foremost, let us make an important distinction: awareness is not mental alertness.
Mental alertness will only enhance your ability to survive in the world. It is a doglike
alertness -- useful in self-preservation but not in self-expansion. Awareness is not something
that you do. Awareness is what you are. Awareness is aliveness.
The dimension of the mind that modern societies have completely ignored at their own
peril is awareness, or chitta. This is intelligence that is completely unsullied by memory. This
is the deepest dimension of the mind and one that connects you with that which is the very
basis of creation. When you are in touch with this dimension, you are in a state of heightened
awareness, which allows you to be fully conscious and intoxicated at the same time -- and with
no external stimulus whatsoever! When you learn to access chitta, being blissful is entirely
natural.
Sleep, wakefulness, death -- these are all just different levels of awareness. Suppose you
were dozing and somebody shook you awake. Boom! The whole world comes back in a single
moment! That is not a small thing. You re-created the whole of existence instantly. The world,
which was obliterated in your experience, pops back. Not in seven days -- in just a moment.
How do you know whether the world exists or not? Only by your experience. There is no
other proof. So, awareness is that which can either create or obliterate this existence. That is
the magic of awareness.
You can pitch your awareness up to different levels. As you notch it up further and further,
whole new dimensions of existence open up in your experience. Worlds that nobody had
imagined in their wildest possible dreams become a living reality for you.
When you are asleep, the world does not exist because you are largely unaware. But even in
sleep, you are not completely unaware. The difference between a sleeping person and a dead
person is one of awareness. Similarly, between a wakeful person and an awakened or
enlightened person, there is a difference. An awakened person sleeps too, but has managed so
much awareness that some part of him or her does not sleep. The sense organs shut down, the
body rests a bit, but everything else is on. This is because awareness has been notched up to
another level.
Awareness is a process of inclusiveness, a way of embracing this entire existence. You
cannot do it, but you can set the right conditions so that it happens. Don't try to be aware. It
will not work. If you keep your body, thought, emotion, and energies properly aligned,
awareness will blossom. You will become far more alive than you are right now.
When you are consciously in touch with your awareness, you gain access to the subtlest

dimension of physicality, or akash. As we have seen before, the universe is just a play of five
elements -- water, fire, earth, air, and ether. Creation is just a frolic of these five. It is ether that
we refer to as "akash" in yogic terminology, and each human being has a certain dimension
of this fifth element around him or her. While the other elements are within the body, the
akashic, or etheric, dimension envelops the physical body -- usually up to a distance of
eighteen to twenty-one inches. Because this element is still physical, it carries information.
Anything that happens at a certain level of intensity or profundity in your life is written into
this field of akash around you.
When you gain conscious access to your awareness, you gain access to the akashic
dimension around your body, as also to the akashic dimension around the planet, the solar
system, and the entire universe. Without any of the instruments of modern technology, the
ancients in India and some other parts of the world amassed a remarkable amount of
knowledge about the cosmos. All this was gleaned through the dimension of chidakash, or the
akashic dimension of our intelligence.
Once you are in touch with your awareness, you don't have to try to accomplish anything.
You don't even have to wish or dream, because the best possible thing that can happen to you
will happen. In the yogic lore, it is said that when you learn to access this dimension, you have
enslaved the divine! God works for you from now on. What exactly does this mean? This
means that once you distance yourself from the compulsiveness of your own genetic and
karmic information, life becomes unburdened, flexible, incredibly effortless. This is a
dimension beyond intellect, beyond identification, beyond memory, beyond judgment, beyond
karma, beyond divisions of every kind. This is the intelligence of existence itself, in which
life always happens exactly the way it should, with absolute and unfaltering ease.
Sadhana
If you are aware at the moment of death, you will be aware beyond death also. Start practicing with sleep.
Sleep is nothing but temporary death. Every night you are presented with a tremendous possibility -- the
possibility of becoming aware of the dimension beyond death.
You can try this experiment tonight. At the moment that you move from wakefulness to sleep, make an
attempt to be aware. This practice can be done in bed. If you can be aware of the last moment when you
make the transition from wakefulness to sleep, you will be aware throughout your sleep.
You will see it is a lot of work. So here is another thing you can do. If you are used to waking up to an
alarm, substitute it with a sound, a tune, or chant that reminds you of your awareness. You can easily train
yourself to make this association. It can become an alarm for your awareness.
Of course, you cannot use an alarm to go to sleep! But the fact of the matter is that unless you
completely dis-identify from your body, it is not easy to move consciously from wakefulness to sleep.
The first possible moment that you come awake, see if you can become consciously aware of something -- 
your breath or your body, for instance. This will help you later when you want to go to bed.
If you achieve waking with awareness and moving from wakefulness to sleep in awareness, you are
deathless. This means that when it comes to shedding the body, you will do it in full awareness. Even
getting close to that moment will change the way your body and mind function, and will alter the quality

of your life quite phenomenally.

Knowing Without Thought
Have you ever watched a beehive closely? It doesn't matter whether you have studied the most
advanced level of engineering, there is still something to learn from a beehive. What a
fabulous feat of engineering it is! This is truly the best apartment complex you could imagine,
exquisitely designed and structured, and amazingly resilient. In no kind of weather have you
ever seen a beehive falling off a tree, have you?
Although it is a magnificent piece of work, do the bees have engineering plans in their
heads? No. These plans are there in their bodies. They know exactly what to do because of a
blueprint in their systems.
Spiritual knowledge or "knowing" was always transmitted like this -- not by thought, not by
word, but in the same way that bees transmit the understanding of how to build beehives
across generations. Once this knowing is transmitted or "downloaded," as it were, everything
that you need to know is right within you. When you download a certain type of software onto
your computer, you don't have to understand how all of it works. You don't have to read
every word that is written in the software. You press one key, and it produces a result; another
key, another result. Suddenly, you have a different kind of phenomenon.
I make a distinction between knowledge and knowing. Knowledge is essentially
accumulated information. All information is only related to the physical nature of existence.
Knowing, on the other hand, is a living intelligence. With or without you, it still is. You are
either in it or you are not: that is the only choice you have.
There is an intrinsic intelligence within you that, as we have seen earlier, is capable of
transforming a piece of bread into a human being. The most sophisticated machine, including
the brain, was created by this intrinsic intelligence. Right now you are just trying to use a
limited section of your brain, and you think that is intelligence. No. There is something within
you that can create an entire human brain in all its magnificent complexity and capability. That
"something" functions in an altogether different way. For example, I don't think with my head
but with every cell in my body. This makes my thinking an organic, seamless, and integrated
process. There is a certain level of integratedness about it, because it involves all of me. I
don't have much thought in my mind at all, unless I choose to think.
Nothing has ever been out of place in this existence. Things have only been out of place in
human societies. Between this piece of life and that piece of life, there can be a comparison.
But for the intelligence that is making all life happen, there is no context, no comparison,
because there is no other. You cannot say whether it is now in place or not -- it is always in
place. There is no other way for it to be.
And the pursuit of yoga is just this: moving from this small headful of information to a
cosmos of intelligence. What a tragic choice people so often end up making -- choosing the

finiteness of the human brain over a universe of infinite knowing.
Sadhana
Just work at removing from the mind the idea that thought is intelligence. The whole process of creation,
from a single atom to the cosmos, is a fantastic expression of intelligence. Right now within your own
body, there is a throbbing intelligence that is the very source of creation. With the overrated intellect that
you own, can you even understand the activity of a single cell in your body in its entirety? The first step
toward moving from the trap of the intellect to the lap of a larger intelligence is to recognize that every
aspect of life -- from a grain of sand to a mountain, a drop to an ocean, from the atomic to the cosmic -- is a
manifestation of a far greater intelligence than your minuscule intellect. If you take this one step, life will
start speaking to you like never before.

Believing versus Seeking
Once it happened…On a certain day, two Irishmen were working on the street, in front of a
London brothel. They saw a Protestant minister coming their way. He rolled up his collar, put
his head down, and quietly slipped into the brothel.
The two men looked at each other and shrugged. "See, what else can you expect from a
Protestant?"
They continued to work. After some time a rabbi came by. He had a muffler around his
throat, almost covering his face. He ducked into the brothel too. The men were deeply pained
and shook their heads sadly. "What has happened? Times have gone bad. A religious man in a
brothel! Why is this happening?"
After a while the local bishop came along. He looked this way and that, tightened his cloak
around himself, and slipped into the brothel.
One of the men turned to the other and said, "One of the girls must be really sick."
The moment you get strongly identified, you lose your perspective on life! Ideas of good
and bad, right and wrong are all your mental constructs. They have nothing to do with life as
such. What was considered to be moral a hundred years ago is intolerable today. What you
think is very good, your children despise. Your ideas of good and bad are just a certain level
of prejudice against life.
The moment you get identified with your limited ideas of morality you become completely
twisted. Your intellect functions around these identifications in such a way that you never see
the world as it is. If you want an element of spirituality to enter your life, the first thing you
must do is drop these rigid ideas of virtue and vice, and learn to look at life just the way it is.
One of the biggest problems in the world today is that right from a person's childhood, an
inflexible system of morality has been imposed on the mind. Whatever you consider good,
you naturally get identified with it. Whatever you consider bad, you are naturally repelled by.
This attraction and aversion is the basis of all strong identification. The nature of your mind
is that whatever you are averse to dominates it. Moralists and preachers have for generations
told humanity to eschew "evil thoughts." That is a surefire strategy to achieve the reverse!
Now, if you try to resist that supposedly "evil thought," it becomes a full-time job. There is
nothing else going on in your head.
The idea of moral superiority has been the source of too many inhuman acts to be ignored.
Most people who believe they are virtuous are hard to live with. Besides, they spend most of
their lives trying to avoid what they consider "wrong" or "sinful." That usually means they
are constantly thinking about it. Avoiding something is not freedom from it. Such morality is
based on exclusion. Spirituality, on the other hand, is born of inclusion.
The essential nature of our humanity has been so suppressed and distorted that the substitute

of "morality" has been brought in to bring some order and sanity to our lives. This has
happened because we have not done anything to keep our humanity active. If your humanity
were active, there would be no need for morality at all.
Morality always differs from person to person, according to time, place, situation -- and
convenience. But wherever humanity has found its expression, at any time in history or in any
culture in the world, it has always been the same and will always be. On a superficial level, in
terms of our values, morals, and ethics, each one of us may be different. But if you know how
to pierce a person deep enough to touch this humanity, each one of us is the same.
To impose morality, you don't need any involvement with people; you just have to dole out
the diktats: "Be good; speak kindly; if you speak in anger, the consequences will be dire," and
so forth. But if you want to kindle the humanity in a person, it takes much more involvement.
It means giving yourself.
Morality is worthwhile because it helps ensure social order, but it is capable of wreaking
inner havoc. Since nobody can live by the morals prescribed by most religions, most of
humanity lives in a state of perpetual guilt, shame, and fear. This is a tragically crippled
existence. Humanity will also bring social order, but it requires no external enforcement
whatsoever.
Make a list of all the things that the major religions of the world call a "sin," and you will
find that just to be alive is a sin. If you are born it is a sin; if you menstruate, it is a sin; if you
copulate, it is a sin. Forget all this, even if you so much as eat a chocolate, you could commit
a sin. Since the very process of life is a sin, you live in perennial guilt and terror. If people
were not so wracked by fear and guilt, the temples, mosques, and churches in the world would
not be as congested as they are now. If you were naturally joyful, you would go and sit on the
beach, or listen to the whisper of the leaves on the tree. Only because religions have instilled
such a sense of fear and shame are you ashamed of your very biology! Now you have to go to
someplace that is considered "holy" to wash it off.
People will always find ways to subvert values, morals, and ethics. But when you are
naturally joyful, you are naturally pleasant with the world around you. Spirituality does not
mean moving away from life; it means becoming alive to the core, in the fullest possible way.
With age, physical agility may diminish, but the level of joy and aliveness need not. If your
level of joy and aliveness is declining, you are committing suicide in installments.
Unfortunately, all kinds of belief systems are passed off as spirituality today. The spiritual
process is always a quest. There is a significant difference between believing and seeking.
Believing means you have assumed something that you do not know; seeking means you have
realized that you do not know. This brings an enormous amount of flexibility. The moment
you believe something, you bring a certain rigidity into the very life process that you are.
This rigidity is not just in attitude; it percolates into every aspect of your life and is the cause
of an enormous amount of suffering in the world. Human society reflects the inner experience
of human beings. Creating human beings who are flexible and willing to look at everything in
a fresh, unprejudiced way, rather than being stuck in beliefs and opinions, definitely makes
for a different kind of society.

Yoga is a method that has worked wonderfully for me, and for millions of people. It is an
entirely scientific method that originates not in faith or belief but in a profound understanding
of the human mechanism. Nor does it come from some naïve sense of optimism. The premise
is simple: if you have a good seed and if you create the right atmosphere, it will sprout.
Creating the right atmosphere of body and mind is the only work. You do not have to do
anything else. No teachings of morality, no metaphysical discourses are needed. If your
humanity is stirred, you are a beautiful human being.
All that is considered to be negative in the world actually springs from limitation. A limited
identity that we impose upon ourselves is what sets us up as "me" versus the "other." It is in
this space of division and separation that all crime and negativity is born. So, striving for the
infinite is an insurance against all negative tendencies. As a race, humanity now needs to
liberate life, rather than control it. From limitation to liberation -- this is the way.

The Wishing Tree
Your mind can be in five different states. It could be inert -- meaning, it is not activated at all; it
is in a rudimentary state. If you energize it, it becomes active but scattered. If you energize it
further, it is no longer scattered, but starts oscillating. If you energize it further, it becomes
one-pointed. If you energize it still further, it will become conscious. And if your mind is
conscious, it is magic; it is a miracle; it is a bridge to the beyond.
Inert minds are not a problem. Someone who is very simpleminded and whose intellect is
still not effervescent has no trouble. He eats well and sleeps well. It is only people who think
too much who cannot eat and sleep properly! Simpleminded people perform all the activities
of the body far better than the so-called intellectuals of the world. There is a certain peace in
them because you need some intelligence to create disturbance and chaos. An inert mind is
closer to animal nature than the human.
The moment you pump in some energy, the mind becomes active, but it is often scattered.
When some people begin their spiritual practices, they may experience a new level of
effervescence that they may not be able to handle, unless they are in congenial atmospheres.
They may interpret this mental effervescence, powered by new energy levels in the system, as
disturbance. There is a pervasive paranoia among people, a tendency to fear everything that is
new. But in reality, all they are doing is moving from inertness toward a higher level of
aliveness.
Once those who have very scattered minds start spiritual practices, they reach a place where
the mind becomes less diffuse. But now it starts oscillating -- one day, it moves this way;
another day, the other way. This is, however, a huge improvement over being scattered, where
the mind moves every moment across ten different places.
If the mind was already oscillating and is energized further, then slowly it becomes
concentrated, or, as we say in yoga, "one-pointed." That is far better than the previous state.
But the highest state is when the mind becomes conscious. In terms of instruments, it is not
your computer, car, or spacecraft, but the human mind that is the most miraculous -- if only
you could use it consciously. The reason why success comes so easily and naturally for one
person, and is a struggle for someone else, is essentially this: one person has organized his or
her mind to think the way he wants, and another thinks against his or her own interests.
A well-established human mind is referred to as a kalpavriksha, or a wishing tree that
grants any boon. With such a mind, whatever you ask for becomes a reality. All you need to
do is to develop the mind to a point where it becomes a wishing tree, rather than a source of
madness. A mind that can manifest whatever it chooses is described in yoga as being in a state
of samyukti. This is a skillfulness that arises out of equanimity.
Once your thoughts get organized, your emotions will also get organized. Gradually, your

energies and body get organized in the same direction as well. However, the order in which
you address these dimensions could vary, depending on what you are ready for. Considering
the realities of the day, most people are not ready for any system unless they are first
intellectually convinced of it. Eventually, once your thoughts, emotions, body, and energy are
channeled in one direction, your ability to create and manifest what you want is incredible.
Today modern science is proving that this whole existence is just a reverberation of energy,
an endless vibration. Thoughts too are a reverberation. If you generate a powerful thought
and let it out, it will always manifest itself. For this to happen, it is important that you do not
impede and weaken your thought by creating negative and self-defeating thought patterns.
Generally, people use faith as a means to banish negative thoughts. Once you become a
thinking human being, however, doubts invariably surface. The way your mind is made, if
God appears right here this moment, you will not surrender to him or her. Instead, you will
want to conduct an investigation to find out whether this is the genuine article or not.
There is an alternative to faith, which is commitment. If you simply commit yourself to
creating what you really care for, now once again your thoughts get organized in such a way
that there are no hurdles. Your thoughts flow freely toward what you want, and once this
happens, the manifestation of your desire is a natural consequence.
To create what you really care for, your desire must first be well manifested in your mind.
Is that what you really want? Think this through carefully. How many times in your life have
you thought, "This is it." The moment you got there you realized that was not it at all! So, first
explore what it is that you really want. Once that is clear and you are committed to creating it,
you generate a continuous process of thought in that direction. When you maintain a steady
stream of thought without changing direction, it will manifest as a reality in your life.
There are yogic processes by which you can touch another dimension of intelligence,
unsullied by memory, called chitta, which we have mentioned earlier. Realizing the power of
chitta is called chit shakti, a simple and powerful process through which you can access the
very source of creation within you.

The Myth of Head versus Heart
It is common to hear people say that their head leads them in one direction and their heart in
another. In yoga, the fundamental basis we establish is this: you are one person, a single,
unified being. There is no separation of head and heart; you are one whole.
Let us first understand what is being referred to as the "head" and the "heart." You usually
assign your thoughts to the head and your emotions to the heart. But if you look at this
carefully and with absolute sincerity, you will realize that the way you think is the way you
feel. But it is also true that the way you feel is the way you think. This is why yoga includes
both thought and emotion as part of the same manomayakosha, or mental body.
What you normally think of as "mind" is the thought process or intellect. But in fact, the
mind has many dimensions: one is the logical aspect; another is the deeper emotional aspect.
The intellect, as we know, is termed buddhi. The deeper dimension of the mind is
conventionally known as the heart. But in yoga this deeper emotional mind is known as
manas. Manas is a complex amalgam of memory that molds emotions in a particular way. So,
the way you feel and the way you think are both activities of the mind.
It is quite simple. If I think you are a wonderful person, I will have sweet emotions toward
you. If I think you are a horrible person, I will harbor nasty emotions about you. If you make
someone your enemy and then try to love him or her, that is hard work. Let us not make hard
work of the simple aspects of life.
The way you think is the way you feel, but thought and feeling seem to be different in your
experience. Why is this so? Because thought has a certain clarity, a certain agility about it.
Emotion is slower. Today, you think this is a very wonderful person and you have warm
feelings about him. Suddenly, he does something that you don't like, and you think he is
horrible. Your thought tells you he is horrible, but your emotion cannot change immediately.
It struggles. If it is sweet now, it cannot turn bitter at the very next moment. It takes time to turn
around. It has a wider turning arc. Depending on the strength of your emotion, maybe it will
take three days or three months or three years, but after some time, it will turn around.
It is not useful to create this conflict between head and heart. Emotion is just the juicier part
of thought. You can enjoy its sweetness, but it is largely the thought that leads the emotion,
whether you recognize it or not. Emotion is not entirely steady. Your emotion also chatters,
goes this way and that, but it is less agile than thought. Since it takes longer to turn, and its
intensity is usually substantially greater than thought, it often seems as though thought and
emotion are different. But they are no more separate than sugarcane and its juice.
Thought is not as intense as emotion in most people's experience. (You usually do not think
as intensely as you get angry, for instance.) But if you generate an intense enough thought, it
can also overwhelm you. Only five to ten percent of the population may be capable of

generating the kind of thought that is so intense that there is no need for emotion. Ninety
percent of the population can only generate intense emotions because they have never done
the necessary work in the other direction. But there are people whose thought is very deep.
They don't have much emotion, but they are very deep thinkers.
It is best not to create polarities within yourself. That makes for civil war and
schizophrenia. Thought and feeling are not different. One is dry. Another is juicy. Enjoy both.

Knowing and Devotion
In the yogic culture, there are two aspects to the word shi-va. The word literally means "that
which is not." Everything that is has come from "that which is not." If you look up at the sky,
you will see many stars and celestial objects, but still the biggest presence out there is a vast
emptiness. It is in the lap of this no-thingness that the dance of creation is happening right
now. This emptiness, which is the very basis of creation, is referred to as "shi-va."
Another dimension of Shiva is Adiyogi, the first yogi, who opened up the incredible
science of yoga for humanity. The yogic culture moves seamlessly from invoking shi-va as
the basis of creation to invoking Shiva as the first yogi. Thus shi-va becomes personified as
Shiva.
Is this contradictory?
Not at all. Because once yoga or ultimate union has happened, there is no longer a
distinction between ultimate reality and the one who has experienced it. In accordance with
this logic, the yogic culture offers two ways to reach the ultimate state: becoming everything
or becoming nothing; the path of gnana, knowing, or the path of bhakti, devotion.
If you want to experience shi-va, or the dimension beyond the physical, you either come to
terms with the laws that govern the non-physical realm or you dissolve into this dimension,
because it spells freedom from the laws that govern the physical realm. If you want to
experience a mountain peak, you either elevate yourself to that level, or simply look up.
These are the two fundamental ways. Otherwise, no meeting is possible. Through knowledge,
you aspire to meet "that which is not" face-to-face. Through devotion, you strive to obliterate
your limited and rigid persona and move toward a more flexible state from which you
approach the dimension beyond the framework of your likes and dislikes. These likes and
dislikes are the very basis of your persona. The endless nature of human desire is an
expression of longing for infinite nature or life beyond physical existence. Infinity and zero
are just positive and negative expressions of the same reality.
Devotion means dropping the dualities of like and dislike, attachment and aversion. It
means "what's fine" and "what's not fine" do not exist for you anymore; everything is fine.
When a devotee says "God is everywhere" or "everything is God," he is essentially saying
"everything is fine." By believing that God is everywhere, he or she arrives at a deep state of
acceptance that is transformative and liberating. Bhakti is all-encompassing and all-inclusive;
it does not discriminate. This is the nature of the ultimate reality as well.
Since ancient times, devotion has been seen as the most important spiritual path, because it
is the quickest. But it has its own pitfalls. The path of knowing is harder, but it is an "eyes-
open" path. Devotion, on the other hand, is an "eyes-closed" path. With knowing, every step
you take, forward or backward, you know where you are going. With devotion, whether you

are moving toward your liberation or you have fallen into a pit, you have no clue.
Generally, for most people, emotion is more intense than thought. That is why devotion has
been glorified above all other paths. But without the right understanding and wisdom, walking
the path of devotion can lead to all kinds of delusions. Devotion is a tool to transcend the dual
nature of logic. But instead of transcending logic, one may end up denying logic altogether.
So, standing on a stable platform of logic before going into the fluid state of devotion
becomes important.
Conversely, many people believe that devotion has no place in the logical realm. But this is
not true. Logic is essentially a cutting tool, an instrument of discernment. If your logic is like
a machete, when you consider something, it will fall into two pieces. But if the scalpel of
logic you employ is very finely honed, you can cut through something, and still seem to leave
it in one piece. When a fine swordsman uses his sword to cut a tree, it is said even the tree
should not know; it should still stand as one. If your intellect becomes this refined, you will
find devotion fits in perfectly with your logic.
Devotion can be very beautiful, joyous, ecstatic, but without the clarity of knowing, it could
lead to stagnation. On the other hand, without emotion, spiritual practices can become barren,
dry, and lifeless. Without bhakti, gnana becomes simply a hairsplitting exercise.
As I said earlier, if you want to experience a mountain peak, you either elevate yourself to
that level, or simply look up. The devotee knows that if you manage to ascend to meet the
peak, you still only stand beside the peak. But if you become the valley, you hold the entire
mountain in your lap.

YOGA AND INTOXICATION
According to legend, Adiyogi drank somarasa, the intoxicating juice of the
moon. He simply imbibed the distilled essence of the moonbeams and was
described as constantly drunk.
Yogis are not against pleasure. They are unwilling to settle for little
pleasures, that's all! They know if you drink a glass of wine, it just gives you a
buzz, but tomorrow morning it gives you a headache and more. Yogis are not
willing to settle for that. To enjoy intoxication you must be totally drunk yet
fully alert. I have never touched any substance, but if you look into my eyes
you will see that I am always stoned. I am totally drunk and fully aware. This is
one of the pleasures that the science of yoga offers.
The end goal is not just intoxication. This blissful state eliminates the fear
of suffering. In this state of nameless ecstasy, there are no concerns about self-
preservation. This is what makes a human being capable of being and acting in
a way that can sometimes seem superhuman to others.
Only when the gnawing anxiety of self-preservation is completely
eliminated from your mind would you dare to explore life. Otherwise you
only want to protect it. Once the fear of suffering is dropped, you can plunge
into any situation without hesitation. Even if you are damned to eternal hell,
you will happily go there because you have no fear of suffering!
When everybody was talking about going to heaven, Gautama the Buddha
said, "You say everything is fine in heaven, so what will I do there? Let me go
to hell and do something to help others, because anyway I cannot suffer."
As long as the fear of suffering persists, you will not dare to explore the
deeper dimensions of life. Only this body needs to be protected; nothing else
within you needs protection. If you are willing to drop the ideas, philosophies,
and belief systems you are currently attached to, you can re-create your entire
life with the very next moment.

Love Mantra
And what about love? Is there such a thing as unconditional love? Can it truly exist between
two human beings? These are frequently asked questions.
One day Shankaran Pillai went to a park. He saw an attractive woman seated on a stone
bench. He settled down on the same bench. After a few minutes he moved a little closer. She
moved away. He waited for a few minutes, then moved a little closer; she moved away. When
he did this again, she moved to the very end of the bench. He went very close and put his arm
around her. She shoved him away. Then he went down on his knees, plucked a flower, handed
it to her, and said, "I love you like I have never loved anybody in my life."
The sun was setting. He had a flower in his hand. He looked at her with a melting gaze.
Above all, the ambience was right. She thawed. Nature took over and they had their way with
each other. The dusk deepened into night. Shankaran Pillai suddenly sprang to his feet and
said, "It's eight o'clock. I need to go."
She said, "What? Now? You just said you loved me more than anyone else!"
"Yes, yes, of course, but my wife will be waiting."
Generally, we have made relationships within frameworks that are comfortable and
profitable for us. People have physical, psychological, emotional, financial, and social needs
to fulfill. To fulfill these needs, one of the best ways is to tell someone, "I love you." This so-
called love has become something of an "open sesame" mantra. You can get what you want by
saying it.
Love is a quality, not something to do with somebody else. Every action that we do is in
some way to fulfill certain needs. If you see this, then there is a possibility that you can grow
into love as your natural quality. But you can go on fooling yourself into believing that the
relationships you have made for convenience, comfort, and well-being are actually
relationships of love. I am not saying there is no experience of love at all in these
associations, but it is within certain limitations. It does not matter how many times true love
has been proclaimed; if a few expectations and requirements are not fulfilled, things fall apart.
This is essentially a mutual benefit scheme.
There is really no such thing as conditional love and unconditional love. There are
conditions and there is love. When you talk about love, it has to be unconditional. The
moment there is a condition, it just amounts to a transaction. Maybe a convenient transaction,
maybe a good arrangement, but that will not fulfill you or transport you to another
dimension. It is just convenient. Love need not necessarily be convenient; most of the time it is
not. It takes life. You have to invest yourself.

If you have to be in love, you should not be. The English expression "falling in love" is
very significant. You don't climb in love, you don't stand in love, you don't fly in love, you
fall in love. Something of you should fall or melt away to accommodate the other. There is a
distinction between a transaction and a love affair. A love affair need not be with any
particular person; you could be having a great love affair with life itself.
What you do or do not do is in accordance with the circumstances you are in. Our actions
are always molded by the demands of external situations. But love is an inner state, and how
you are within yourself can definitely be unconditional. Acts of love can become tedious and
stressful over a period of time. You realize love is not something that you do; love is the way
you are.
Sadhana
Love is never between two people. It is what happens within you, and your interiority need not be enslaved
to someone or something else. Try this for fifteen minutes or so: go sit with something that means nothing to
you right now -- maybe a tree, a pebble, a worm, or an insect. Do it a few days in a row. After a while, you
will find you can look upon it with as much love as you do your wife or husband or mother or child.
Maybe the worm does not know this. That doesn't matter. If you can look at everything lovingly, the
whole world becomes beautiful in your experience.

Devotion: A Dimensional Shift
Most people live cautiously, measuring out their love and joy in sparing doses for fear that it
will run out. The most generous way to live is to set an example to the rest of the world by
living life full-throttle and beyond all limitations. If you are so stingy that you cannot love,
laugh, or live totally, you are what we in India term a kanjoos -- a miser -- on all levels!
Devotion means you are not a kanjoos -- you are full of juice! A devotee is someone who
seeks to explore and experience life as fully as possible.
Devotion is not a dissection of life, but a total embrace. It is not a love affair, but a crazy
business. Love itself is crazy, but there are shreds of sanity attached to it; you can still recover.
In devotion, there is no shred of sanity; there is no way to recover. Devotees have the sweetest
experience of life. Everybody may think they are idiots, but they are having the best time on
the planet. You decide who the idiot is!
When I say "devotion," I am not talking about faith or belief. Belief is just like morality.
People who believe something often think they are superior to others. All that happens the
moment you believe something is that your stupidity acquires confidence. Confidence and
stupidity are a very dangerous combination, but they generally go together. If you start
looking at the world around you, you would clearly understand that what you know is so
minuscule that there is no way to act with confidence. A belief system takes away this
problem; it gives you enormous confidence, but it does not cure your stupidity.
Devotion is not an act; it is not directed toward one thing or another; the object of devotion
is immaterial. It is just that with devotion you have dissolved all the resistance in you so that
the divine can transpire as effortlessly as breath. The divine is not an entity sitting up there; it
is a living force every moment of your life. Devotion makes you aware of this.
Once it happened…At a traditional Catholic family dinner, the man of the house came to the
table, looked at the food, and, as usual, grumbled and cursed his wife and everything around
him. After the cursing was over and everyone settled down, he sat down and uttered his
prayer, "Dear God, thank you for the daily bread and all the wonderful things on the table."
His five-year-old girl sat meekly at the table. You know, these five-year-olds -- extra
pillows and little cushions are always kept for them, but still they can never really reach the
plate. So, this little five-year-old girl, with the table up to her neck, squeaked, "Daddy, does
God hear all our prayers?"
Immediately, the Christian in him awakened and he said, "Yes, of course. Every prayer we
utter, He always hears."
Then the girl sank a little lower, because she sank into her thoughts. After a while, she said,
"But, Daddy, does He also listen to all the other things that we say?"
"Yes, every moment of our lives God is listening to everything that we say and do."

Then she sank a little lower and said, "Daddy, then which does He believe?"
Tell me, which should God believe -- your prayers or your curses? He must be thoroughly
confused! He must have given up. Because we systematize or institutionalize the most subtle
parts of life, suddenly everything loses its vibrancy and becomes lifeless. The same words are
being uttered, parrot-like, by everybody, but they do not mean anything anymore. When we
say something that does not really mean anything to us, that does not burn within us, it is
tantamount to a lie. It is actually better to shut up.
We are always trying to mimic those whom we consider to be our mentors and role
models. When somebody said something similar two thousand years ago it worked for him -- 
because of the fire in his heart, because of the truth that was burning within him, not because
of the words he uttered.
There is nothing tame or tepid about devotion. It is not for the lily-livered. It is hot.
Devotion scorches.

AKKA MAHADEVI
Around nine hundred years ago in southern India, there lived a female mystic
called Akka Mahadevi. Akka was a devotee of Shiva. Ever since her childhood,
she had regarded Shiva as her beloved, her husband. It was not just a belief;
for her it was a living reality.
The king saw this beautiful young woman one day, and decided he wanted
her as his wife. She refused. But the king was adamant and threatened her
parents, so she yielded.
She married the man, but she kept him at a physical distance. He tried to
woo her, but her constant refrain was, "Shiva is my husband." Time passed and
the king's patience wore thin. Infuriated, he tried to lay his hands upon her. She
refused. "I have another husband. His name is Shiva. He visits me, and I am
with him. I cannot be with you."
Because she claimed to have another husband, she was brought to court for
prosecution. Akka is said to have announced to all present, "Being a queen
doesn't mean a thing to me. I will leave."
When the king saw the ease with which she was walking away from
everything, he made a last futile effort to salvage his dignity. He said,
"Everything on your person -- your jewels, your garments -- belongs to me.
Leave it all here and go."
So, in the full assembly, Akka just dropped her jewelry, all her clothes, and
walked away naked. From that day on, she refused to wear clothes even though
many tried to convince her otherwise. It was unbelievable for a woman to be
walking naked on the streets of India at the time -- and this was a beautiful
young woman. She lived out her life as a wandering mendicant and composed
some exquisite poetry that lives on to this very day.
In a poem (translated by A. K. Ramanujan), she says:
People,
male and female,
blush when a cloth covering their shame
comes loose.
When the lord of lives
lives drowned without a face

in the world, how can you be modest?
When all the world is the eye of the lord,
onlooking everywhere, what can you
cover and conceal?
Devotees of this kind may be in this world but not of it. The power and
passion with which they lived their lives make them inspirations for
generations of humanity. Akka continues to be a living presence in the Indian
collective consciousness, and her lyrical poems remain among the most
prized works of South Indian literature to this very day.

Embracing Mystery
It is only a juvenile intelligence that analyzes things and arrives at a conclusion. If your
intelligence is sufficiently evolved and mature, you realize that the more you analyze, the
further away you are from any conclusion.
If you go deeply into any aspect of life, you will move further and further away from any
conclusion. Life becomes more mysterious than ever before. The more you delve into life,
you see that it is an endless and unfathomable process. You cannot get it because you are it.
When you realize experientially that every atom, every grain of sand, every pebble, every
piece of life from the smallest to the biggest is unfathomable, you will naturally bow down in
utmost devotion to everything. If you simply sit here and breathe, you will know life better
than through any deep analysis.
As we dissect everything, wanting to excavate truth from physical nature, we enter into the
minute dimensions of particle science. From protons, neutrons, and electrons to neutrinos,
bosons, and super-symmetric particles, we seem to be going deeper and deeper. But all this is
still only in the realm of physical nature. Dark matter, we are told, comprises more of the
universe than matter -- and this dark matter is not composed of atoms at all but of particles of
a still unknown type.
Pick up a glass of water and take a look at it. What do you really know about it? Why, for
instance, do hydrogen and oxygen combine to become water? Or pick up a pebble and gaze at
it long and hard. Why does it have this particular shape, size, grain, texture? Or just look at
yourself: why are you the way you are? Many would reply, "Oh, my father, my mother -- and
here I am." But why are you like this? What is the basis of this form, this body, this
individuality?
Traditionally in India, it was said that one ought to bow down to everything that one
encountered. It did not matter if it was a tree or a cow or a snake or a cloud -- you just bowed
down to it. When you bow to everything, it could be because you are a fool, or because you
have looked at life in its utmost profundity. The difference between an idiot and an
enlightened being is thin. The two often look similar, but they are actually worlds apart. An
idiot is incapable of drawing conclusions. A mystic is unwilling to draw conclusions. The rest
have glorified their conclusions as knowledge. The fool just enjoys whatever little he knows
and one who has seen life in its utmost depth enjoys it absolutely. The rest are the ones who
constantly struggle and suffer.
One morning a man walked into his office and told his boss, "Boss, I want you to know,
three big companies are after me. You must give me a raise."
His boss said, "What! Which companies? Who wants you?"

He said, "The electric company, the telephone company, and the gas company."
Something is always behind the so-called smart people, those with confirmed conclusions
about life! Or else, they are always busy chasing something. An idiot can sit here quietly. A
mystic can sit here quietly. The rest cannot.
Devotion is a simple method of dissolving all the hurdles on the path. If those who are
struggling to contain the chattering of the "monkey mind" become devoted, the chatter will
just evaporate.
If you learn to bow, to hold everything higher than yourself, it does not seem to be good
for your self-esteem. But becoming a devotee does not mean you are a pushover. That which
knows how to bend will not break. (That is why you are encouraged to do your hatha yoga
every morning -- essentially so your body does not break!) That is so with everything within
you.
Unfortunately, these days even so-called spiritual leaders are talking about self-esteem.
"Self" and "esteem" are both a problem. Both are very limited entities; both are fragile; both
will always be insecure. If you have no esteem, very good. If you have no self, fabulous!
Sadhana
When you experience something as far bigger than yourself, bowing down will naturally occur to you. If
you want to become a devotee, at least once an hour in all the waking moments of your life, put your
hands together and bow to something. It does not matter who or what. Don't choose. Whatever you see,
just bow your head -- whether it is a tree, a mountain, a dog, a cat, or anything. This need not be a physical
act; it could be internal action. Just do it throughout the day, once an hour. See if it can become once a
minute. When it becomes once a minute, there is no need to use your hands and body; simply do it within
yourself. Once that becomes your way of being, you are a devotee.
Even if you spend a lifetime, you still won't understand a leaf, an elephant, an ant, or an atom. You are
incapable of figuring out even a molecule of DNA. Everything you cannot grasp is in a higher state of
existential intelligence than you are. When you see this -- really see this -- you are a devotee.
A devotee is someone who is willing to dissolve into the object of devotion. If you are a devotee of life,
you will become one with it. Don't be an outsider to the life process. Become a devotee. Dissolve.

Following the Pranic Trail
At present, human beings identify with the body and the mind in a variety of ways. But
fundamentally, what you call "myself" is just a certain amount of energy. Modern science has
proved beyond all doubt that all of existence is made up of the same energy, manifesting itself
in millions of bewilderingly different ways. When Einstein gives us the formula E = mc2, he
is, to put it simply, saying that everything in the universe can be seen as just one energy.
Religions all over the world have been proclaiming the same thing using somewhat different
terminology when they assert that "God is everywhere."
Modern science has arrived at its conclusions through mathematical deduction. Religion
has arrived at its conclusions through belief. But the yogi is a hard nut who will not settle for
deduction or belief. He or she seeks to experience the ultimate through the enhancement of
individual perception. Consequently, the yogic tradition does not mention God, or deny it
either.
The human longing to expand is actually just an expression of the ultimate formless
intelligence that is the very source of who we are. Instead of trying to find the source of our
longing, we try to give it expression in the outside world. Due to the nature of our outward-
bound senses, we are deceived into believing that outward expression will somehow bring
fulfillment. When you misinterpret the expression as the cause, it will only bring
entanglement, not freedom.
The sole aim of every individual's life energies is to touch the infinite -- the very core of
our making. They know no other aim. Your mind may be thinking of money or a new house,
your body may be longing for food or sleep, but your life energies are always longing to
break the boundaries set by your physical and mental structures. Slowly, in the process of
living, many people have stopped following the trajectory of their life energies. The result is
that they start believing that they are separate or autonomous entities.
But separateness is a myth. The content of both your physical and mental bodies has been
gathered from the outside. They belong to you but they are not you. If you want to go the way
your body is going currently, you should know that it is going straight to the grave. Similarly,
whatever you know as the mind is a complex mess of all the stuff that it has been
accumulating. The objectives of the mind are entirely self-created. They may seem to be fine
right now, but they usually take you completely away from the process of life. So, if you go
the way your mind goes, you should know you are heading toward an alternative
psychological creation; it may be fascinating, stimulating, or even comforting for a length of
time, but it bears no relation at all to existential reality.
The entire yogic process is aimed at aligning oneself with the natural longing of life to
expand in an unlimited way. It gives conscious expression to this basic human need. The

various spiritual practices in the yogic sciences are intended to assist this longing on three
levels: the physical body, the mental body, and the third sheath, or layer, of the human
mechanism, the pranamayakosha, or the energy body.
Yoga means to experience the mental and physical process distinctly, not as the basis of
yourself, but as that which is caused by you. If you manage these two instruments of body and
mind consciously, then your experience of life is one hundred percent of your making. All
you need to do is create a distance between you and everything that you accumulated from
outside.
Everything that you have gathered in this life accompanies you wherever you go. It is
deeply attached to you, and you, in turn, are deeply attached to it, on some unconscious level.
It becomes an encumbrance because you don't know when to put it down and when to pick it
up. It is like a sack you carry on your shoulders all the time.
But it is possible for you to put it down. It will still be your companion, but at least it won't
be that burdensome! It is definitely possible to create some distance between you and what you
have gathered. You can use it when you want, but you need not be identified with it. If you
cannot maintain this distance, your whole vision of life will be clouded. Your memory and
your imagination -- which includes all your ideas, beliefs, and emotions -- belong to the
psychological realm. Life can be tasted and transcended only when there is a distinction
between the psychological and the existential.
The spiritual process means a return to life. It means following the deep intelligence of
your life energies. There are many ways of recognizing which way your life energies want to
go. If you dis-identify with physiological and psychological processes, you will clearly see
this. It is only when you consciously head in the direction of your life energies that you find
equanimity and harmony. It is only in such a stable state that you would dare to explore the
highest levels of exuberance and venture into the deepest mysteries of life.

PAIN NOT SUFFERING
In my motorcycle days, I used to ride all over the country. One day when I was
in a remote area, a freak accident occurred, and my calf muscle was slashed
right up to the bone. So I went to a local clinic and asked the doctor to fix my
leg. The doctor examined the wound and said there was no way he could,
because he had no anesthetic facility. He suggested that I rush to a bigger
hospital and seek immediate medical attention. I said I didn't have the time, that
I had to continue my journey because I had a schedule to meet. I told him he
had to fix it. He refused. I was bleeding profusely. After much argument, he
gave in because a pool of blood was gathering where I stood. So without any
anesthesia, he began to put my muscle together, which took about fifty-two
sutures on three different levels. Through this entire process, I was having a
conversation with him. He was sweating and puffing through it all. After it was
over, he asked me incredulously, "Is there no pain in your leg at all?"
There was pain. Terrible, unbearable pain. But pain is a natural
phenomenon, and it is good. Without it you wouldn't know if your leg was
chopped off. But suffering is another matter altogether. Pain is bad enough;
why make it worse with suffering? Suffering is entirely self-created. And
every human being has the choice: to suffer or not to suffer. It doesn't take
much intelligence to choose the latter.

The Karmic Conundrum
Once it happened…On a certain day, Shankaran Pillai was sitting in a bar with his buddies.
Suddenly, the clock struck eight. Shankaran Pillai put down his glass, rose, and starting
walking toward the door.
His friends said, "Hey, what's the problem? Where are you going? Why don't you finish
your drink?" But Shankaran Pillai kept walking wordlessly, zombielike, toward the door.
The friends laughed and said, "Okay, now we know! It's eight o'clock and you have to be
home. You're afraid of your wife, aren't you? What are you -- a man or a mouse?"
Shankaran Pillai stopped, turned around, and said, "I am the man of the house. If I were a
mouse, my wife would be afraid of me!"
He walked slowly home. His wife's rule was that he should reach home by eight. Today, the
man-mouse argument and his slow, inebriated pace had delayed him. His wife was sitting on
the porch, rolling pin in hand. She glowered at him and said, "You fool, once again drinking?
Come here and I'll show you."
Shankaran Pillai was a frail but agile man. He walked toward her meekly, but then suddenly
leapt over her and ran into the house. She rose and lumbered in after him. He made her run all
over the house, confident that she would never be able to catch him. After much running
around, he darted into the bedroom and dove under the bed. She rushed behind him. She was a
big woman and could not slip under the bed. He lay there, secure, as she hollered, "You
coward! What are you doing there under the bed? Come on out! Are you a man or a mouse?"
Shankaran Pillai replied, "I am the man of this house. I have the freedom to lie down
wherever I want."
It was the only place he could be at that moment, but he needed to claim it was his freedom!
Unfortunately, most human beings are doing much the same thing: they are labeling their
compulsions, their limitations, as their choices. If you can joyfully do whatever is needed in a
given situation, this is freedom. But limiting yourself to doing only what you like is a
horribly compulsive way to live. This compulsiveness is the trick of karma -- that ancient
word that has been mangled by popular usage across the world.
What exactly is karma?
"Karma" literally means "action." Action is of three kinds. It could be in terms of the body,
mind, or energy. Whatever you do with your body, mind, or energy, leaves a certain residue.
This residue forms a pattern of its own, and these resultant patterns stay with you. When you
gather a huge volume of impressions, slowly these shape themselves into tendencies, and you
become like an automatic toy, a slave to your patterns, a puppet of your past.

Karma is like old software that you have written for yourself, unconsciously. Depending on
the type of actions that you perform, you write your software. Once you write a certain type
of software, your whole system functions accordingly. Based on the information from the
past, certain memory patterns are formed and keep recurring. Now, life is just cyclical.
This is why the same patterns keep returning in your life. There are a few variations, but
they remain essentially the same, repeating themselves across generations. After a while, this
repetitiveness can be deadly. It is important to see that these patterns rule you from within, not
from without. No one has to exercise any external control upon you. Your inner autocrat rules
you all the time. You may think it is a new day. Circumstances may change, but internally you
are experiencing the same thing over and over again. And so, the more things change, the
more they stay the same -- not physically but experientially! You are helplessly stuck in the
karmic rut.
Freedom is now an empty word because the way you think, feel, and understand life -- even
the way you sit, stand, and move -- is conditioned by your past impressions. From the moment
you were born, your parents, your family, your education, your friends, where you lived, and
where you traveled -- all this decided everything about you. Karma is encrypted on every
aspect of life. It is imprinted on your mental memory, the fundamentals of your body, your
chemistry, your very energy. These are all backup systems. Even if you lose your body or
your mind, you still do not lose your karma! The backup systems are so efficient.
What you consider to be your personality -- the bundle of traits and tendencies that you are
 -- is because of information you have gathered unconsciously. These tendencies have been
traditionally described as vasanas. The word "vasana" literally means "smell." Depending
upon what type of garbage is in the bin today, that is the kind of smell that will emanate from
it. Depending upon what type of smell you emit, you attract certain kinds of life situations to
yourself.
Suppose today there is rotten fish in the garbage bin. It may stink for you, but many other
creatures are drawn to it. Tomorrow, if there are flowers in the garbage bin, it smells
different and still other creatures are drawn to it.
When I first went down south to the city of Coimbatore almost thirty years ago, I stayed as
a guest in a physician's house. He was a gregarious man and told me of an incident that
happened in his family. They were from a coastal region in India, and his elder daughter was
particularly fond of fish. She was studying up north in the hills of Dehradun where she did not
get fish to eat, so whenever she came home for her vacation, she wanted to have it every day.
His wife was a vegetarian, but she would cook fish even though she did not eat it.
There is a particular small dried fish that you would know if you are from that part of the
country. It has an incredible odor. If it is being carried in a truck, you would like to drive two
miles behind the truck or hold your breath as you pass it. Cooking it in the house is a pretty
good strategy to evict your neighbors from their home! This girl wanted that particular fish
to be prepared.
So as they were frying this dried fish, it was as if the entire house was being fumigated.
Such an odor could raise the dead! The mother went into the kitchen to tell the cooks how to

prepare it, but the moment the stink began to emanate from the frying pan, she ran out of the
kitchen because she could not stand it. Meanwhile, the girl, who was in her bedroom, also
smelled it and ran out, following the scent. Both mother and daughter crashed headlong into
each other -- and the mother ended up with a broken nose!
I mention this incident not as an illustration of reward and punishment but as an illustration
of the possible consequences of strong attachment and aversion. When these dominate your
life, some kind of smashup is inevitable. Vasanas, or tendencies, are generated by a vast
accumulation of impressions caused by your physical, mental, and energy actions. What you
call your personality is just an expression of these tendencies.
Now, today if you are doing something in a particular way and someone asks you why you
can't do it differently, you often declare, "This is my nature. Can't I do what I want?" This is
not your nature. You are not doing what you want. These tendencies have become compulsive.
This is your bondage, a kind of software you are writing for yourself unconsciously. Once
your software is fixed, it looks as if there is only one path you can walk in your life. It looks
as if your destiny is predetermined. A spiritual process, however, means we have made up our
minds to rewrite our software, consciously.
In India, "karma" is a common word. If people exhibit any kind of compulsive behavior,
others will immediately say, "Oh, that is their karma." This means that it is of their making.
The bitterness or sweetness of any experience is not in the event itself, but in how you
perceive and respond to it. What is a very bitter experience for one person could be a blessing
for another.
Once a grief-stricken man sat by a gravestone, crying bitterly and hitting his head against it.
"My life! Oh, how senseless it is. My body is a worthless carcass now that you have gone. If
only you had lived! If only fate had not been so cruel! If only you hadn't left, how different
my life would have been!"
A clergyman nearby overheard him and said, "I assume the person lying beneath this
mound of earth was someone of great importance to you?"
"Importance? Yes, indeed!" wept the man, wailing even louder. "It was my wife's first
husband!"
So, the quality of your life is always decided by how you experience life, not by what life
offers you.
It is important to remember that karma is not a negative word. Karma is what gives stability
and structure to your life. Every moment, impressions are flooding in torrents into your
system through your five sense organs and each of them is being recorded. There is nothing
wrong with this stored information. It is very useful for your survival. If you deleted all of it,
you would not know how to handle even the simplest aspects of life. The spiritual process
does not seek to demolish this storehouse of karmic impressions, but helps you to become
more conscious of it, and establish a little space, which allows you to stand outside of it.
So, your software is not in itself the problem. It turns into a problem only if it becomes the
ruling factor in your life. To talk of good karma and bad karma is like talking of good
bondage and bad bondage. There is no such thing. Karma is just your own creation. It is

neither good nor bad. It is software that can be useful if you have some freedom from it. This
is all the spiritual process aims to do: loosen the grip of karma upon you. Whatever be the
nature of your past karma, there is enough awareness in a human being to take complete
charge of the karma of the present moment.
If you want any kind of transformation, any kind of forward movement in your life, it can
only happen if you break the cyclical patterns of karma. Anything that is cyclical suggests
constant motion, but it doesn't really go anywhere. If you are sensitive to life, you realize this
early. If you are less sensitive, you realize this as you grow older. Everything may seem to be
going your way: your professional life may be flourishing, your capital may be increasing,
your family may be thriving, but you are not really getting anywhere. The faster you achieve
your success, the faster you realize this. When you are in a certain state of insufficiency, you
keep thinking that everything will be okay once your dreams are realized. But if all the things
you dreamt of happen very quickly, you suddenly realize that, although everything is
happening as you thought it should, life still remains unfulfilled and your longings persist.
Until you break this cycle, there is no real choice in your life. Sometimes, you may have
felt you have experienced a breakthrough. Things seem to have changed, and everything
seems great for the next three days, but on the fourth day, you fall back into the same rut.
Hasn't this happened to you any number of times? That is because there is no freedom of
thought, emotion, action, and, above all, no freedom of experience as long as you are in the
karmic grip.
At the same time, avoiding karma is not the answer either. Avoidance may give you some
balance and stability in day-to-day life, but slowly it saps you of life and joy. This is very
negative karma in itself. Denying, suppressing, or avoiding life brings more bondage than
freedom. The desire, "I don't want karma," is itself a big karma!
The very process of living is itself a dissolution of karma. If you live every moment of
your life totally, you dissolve enormous amounts of karma. When you experience everything
that comes your way absolutely, when you experience every life breath with utmost intensity,
without the distractions of thought and emotion, devoid of any psychological drama, you are
liberated from the very process of birth and death. You are not only more alive; you are life
itself.
Yoga offers a way to distance yourself not just from your karma, but from the very source
of karma, which is the discriminatory intellect. It offers you the choice every moment of your
existence to be either a victim or a spectator or the very master of your life. With a certain
amount of effort and practice we all can write a software of joy and well-being for
themselves.
Sadhana

When you realize that all your material achievements are of value only in comparison with those who
don't have them, this is joy that springs from another's deprivation. Can you really call this joy? Isn't it
actually a kind of sickness? It is time everyone addressed this. If you were alone on this planet, what
would you want for yourself? Ask yourself this question and see where it takes you.
Try this. Sit alone for five minutes and see what your life would be like if you were absolutely alone in
this world. If there were nobody or nothing to compare yourself with, what would you truly long for?
What would really matter to you if there were no external appreciation or critique? If you do this every
day, you will become aligned with the longings of the life that you are, rather than the accumulated karmic
mess that you believe you are.

The Mechanics of Life
Fundamentally, kriya means "internal action." An internal action is one that does not involve
either the body or the mind or the physical dimensions of energy. As we have established
earlier, the body and the mind are yours, but still external to you. You have gathered both
from the outside: the body is an accumulation of food, and the mind an accumulation of ideas.
Even the imprints upon the energy body are an accumulation of the impressions of the five
senses. When you have the ability to perform action with the non-physical aspect of your
energy, then it is termed a "kriya." All this may sound somewhat esoteric, but only if you are
inducted by someone who has mastery over the realms of energy will it become possible for
you to practice a kriya.
If your actions find outward expression, involving body, mind, and the physical dimensions
of energy, that is karma. But if you turn inward and perform an action beyond all dimensions
of physicality, that is kriya. Karma is the process of binding you. Kriya is the process of
liberating you. The most significant aspect of yoga is always to perform action beyond the
physical dimensions of energy. Among the four dimensions of physicality, you are most
conscious of bodily actions, less of the mental, much less of the emotional, and negligibly of
the energetic. The moment you learn to perform action with the non-physical aspect of your
life energy, you suddenly move to a new level of freedom within and outside of yourself.
How do you access the non-physical aspect of your life energy? The yogic practices, which
involve postures, breath, attitudes of the mind, and energy activation, are all essentially
oriented toward aligning the first three layers of the body: the physical, the mental, and the
energetic body. It is only in aligning them that you find access to dimensions beyond the
physical -- to the fundamental life energy itself.
I have seen any number of people who start doing a simple kriya, and suddenly become so
creative that they are able to achieve things that they never imagined possible in their lives.
This is simply because they loosened their karmic foundations a little. They shook up their
life energies for a change, instead of being entangled with their physical processes of body,
mind, and energy. This is something every human being can learn to do.
Kriya yoga is a very powerful way to walk the spiritual path, but at the same time it is
tremendously demanding. For many modern urban people who are unaccustomed to using
their body in its full versatility, kriya yoga could seem arduous and inhuman. This is because
kriyas are elaborate and involve a great deal of discipline, focus, and exactitude. Most people
do not have the body, the attitude, or the stability of emotion for this yoga path, primarily
because they are used to living, right from their childhood, in a perpetual state of comfort.
Being used to a level of physical comfort is not a problem. But being in constant quest of
comfort: this is a great problem. That kind of attitude and emotion is unsuitable for the path of

kriya yoga.
Also, kriya yoga cannot be done with people who talk "freedom" all the time. It is not for
people who keep asking, "Why am I not free to eat my ice cream? Why can't I wake up
whenever I feel like it? Why can't I eat, drink, or have sex with whatever, whoever, whenever I
feel like?" If you take the path of kriya, a certain fundamental discipline has to be brought into
all physical, psychological, and emotional processes. If you want to hit the peak of your
consciousness, this discipline is essential. You cannot be partying till early morning and
attempt to scale Mount Everest tomorrow! The same logic holds true here.
When you are given a certain kriya yoga regimen, you have to follow it. You may
understand the need for the discipline as you go along, but it can never be fully explained.
And if it has to be explained, the essence of the kriya will be lost. This is because kriya is a
tool to transcend the framework of logic and experience in order to access those non-physical
dimensions that are considered spiritual or mystical.
If I wanted to teach you kriyas just as practices, it would be simple to put them in a book
from which you could learn and memorize them. But for the kriya to be a live process, to be
imprinted in your system in a certain way, it needs a certain discipline, dedication, and
receptivity. When you walk a completely new terrain, if there is no trust in the one who guides
you, then the journey becomes unnecessarily long and difficult.
Generally, on the path of kriya, most gurus make the disciples wait. Traditionally, when
students went to a guru to learn kriya yoga, they might well have been told to sweep the floor
for a year, and then wash the dishes for another! If their trust still did not waver, then the guru
might consider initiating them into the kriyas. There is a reason for this. Once you empower
people in a particular way that makes their system vibrant beyond normal standards, they can
cause great damage to themselves if their attitudes and emotions are not as they should be. But
in today's world, to get that kind of time with people, to arrive at that kind of trust and then
imprint these kriyas, is difficult. It is not impossible, but the chances are remote.
I spent twenty-one years of my life transforming a powerful kriya, the Shambhavi
Mahamudra, in order that it might be taught to large numbers of people in today's world.
Certain aspects that could empower people either to harm themselves or others, or influence
the elements around them have been firewalled, so only the physical, psychological, and
spiritual benefits remain. For those two decades I deliberately stayed away from all forms of
public outreach, because my entire focus was primarily on re-crafting the kriya to ensure that
it could be widely imparted without any adverse effects.
Kriya yoga as a full-fledged path is important only for those interested in exploring
mystical dimensions. If your concern is only well-being or if you are just seeking realization,
kriyas can be used in a small way. But kriya yoga as an exclusive path is not necessary
because it requires too much application.
If you follow the path of kriya very intensely without guidance, it may take a few lifetimes
to bear fruit. If you have someone to actively guide the process, kriya can be a most powerful
and magnificent way to explore the inner nature and mystical phenomena. Otherwise kriya is
a somewhat roundabout route. What you are seeking on this path is not just well-being,

blissfulness, or realization. Instead, you want to know the very mechanics of life-making; you
want to know the engineering of life. That is why it is a much longer process.
People on the kriya path have a completely different kind of presence about them because
of the mastery over their energies. They can dismantle life and put it back together. If you are
pursuing the path of gnana, for example, your intellect could become razor-sharp, but there is
still very little you can do with your energies. Similarly, on the path of bhakti, or devotion,
there is nothing much you can do with your energies. (Nor do you care, because the intense
sweetness of your emotions is all that matters; you only want to dissolve into the object of
your devotion.) If you are on the path of karma, you can do many things in the external world,
but you can do nothing with yourself. Kriya yogis, on the other hand, can do whatever they
wish with their inner world, and achieve a great deal in the outer world as well.
Sadhana
The very way the karmic structure works in every human being is essentially cyclical. If you observe very
closely, within a day the same cycles are happening many times over. If you are very observant, you will
see that every forty minutes you are going through a physiological cycle. Once you see that, then with the
necessary attention and awareness you can ride the cycle and move toward transcendence from the
limitations that these cycles set. So, every forty minutes, life presents you with an opportunity -- the
opportunity to become conscious.
Every forty to forty-eight minutes, there is also a shift of dominance in the way the breath is moving
through the right and left nostrils. It is dominant in the right nostril for a length of time, and then in the left.
Become aware of this so you know at least something about you is changing. This awareness can be
further enhanced into awareness of the solar and lunar influences upon the body. If you bring your
physical system in sync with the lunar and solar cycles, your physical and psychological health is
guaranteed.

The Energy Labyrinth
The yogic system offers us a comprehensive and elaborate view of the anatomy of the human
energy body. It has mapped seventy-two thousand channels (or nadis, as they are called) in the
energy system. The prana, or energy, moves through these channels. These seventy-two
thousand channels spring, in turn, from three basic channels. The channel on the right is
known as pingala, the left is known as ida, and the central is known as sushumna.
These three channels are the basis of the energy system. Pingala is symbolized as the
masculine and ida is symbolized as the feminine. "Masculine" and "feminine" do not refer
here to biological differences, but to certain qualities in nature that have been identified as
such. These qualities are represented by these two channels.
If a person's pingala is very pronounced, then outgoing, exploratory qualities will be
dominant. If the ida is more pronounced, receptive and reflective qualities will be dominant.
Whether one is a man or woman has nothing to do with this. You may be a man, but the ida
may be more dominant; you may be a woman, but the pingala may be more dominant.
The pingala and ida are also symbolized as the sun and the moon -- the sun representing the
masculine, and moon representing the feminine. The sun is aggressive and outgoing; the
moon receives and reflects. The cycles of the moon are deeply connected with the female
body as well. On the level of your mind, pingala represents the logical dimension; ida
represents the intuitive dimension. These two dualities are the fundamentals of the physical
sphere of life. A human being is complete only when both the masculine and the feminine
function at full force and are in proper balance.
Sushumna, the central nadi, is the most significant aspect of your physiology, yet it
generally goes unexplored. It is independent of the seventy-two thousand nadis, but it is the
fulcrum of the whole system. Once the energies enter your sushumna, irrespective of what is
happening around you, you have a certain balance. Right now, you may be reasonably
balanced, but if the outside situation is challenging, you will also be disturbed. Once energies
enter the sushumna, however, your inner way of being becomes independent of the outside,
because it is independent of the seventy-two thousand nadis.
There is a great deal of chakra talk nowadays. "Chakra" means "wheel," and has a very
specific meaning and significance in the yogic system. These days there are "wheel alignment
centers" that claim to balance your chakras, clear your blocks, and heal you of ailments, past,
present, and future. Lots of people are "doing" chakras these days. It has become a huge fad,
but it can be dangerous. It is time to approach this very subtle subject with care and precision.
The nadis do not have a physical manifestation. If you cut the body and look inside, you
will not find them. But as you become more aware, you will notice the energy is not moving
at random but in established pathways.

The chakras are powerful centers in the physiology where the nadis meet in a particular
way to create an energy vortex. Like the nadis, the chakras are of a subtle nature and do not
have a physical existence. They always meet in the form of a triangle (not a circle, as the word
"chakra" suggests). The moving part in a machine is always a circle, because a circle is
capable of movement with least resistance. These energy centers are so named because the
wheel suggests movement or dynamism.
There are 114 chakras in the body. Two are outside the body and 112 are within the body.
Among these 112, there are 7 major chakras. For most people, 3 of these are active; the
remaining are either dormant or mildly active. You do not have to activate all 114 chakras to
live a physical life. You can live quite a complete life with just a few of them. If you were to
activate all 114 chakras, you would have no sense of body at all. The purpose of yoga is to
activate your energy system in such a way that your body consciousness is constantly being
lowered, so you can sit here in the body, but are no longer the body.
In southern India, there was a legendary yogi named Sadashiva Brahmendra. He was a
nirkaya, which literally means "bodiless yogi." He had no sense of body. Wearing clothes
does not even occur to a person in such a state. He just walked around naked. Also in such a
condition, there is no sense of home, property, or physical boundary.
One day, he happened to walk into the king's garden on the banks of the river Kaveri. The
king was sitting there, relaxing with his queens. Sadashiva Brahmendra wandered into the
garden, unaware of his own nakedness. The king was furious. "Who is this fool that dares to
walk naked in front of my women?"
He sent his soldiers after him. The soldiers ran behind Sadashiva Brahmendra, calling out
to him. He did not turn back. He continued to walk. Angered, one of the soldiers took out his
sword and struck him, severing his right arm. Sadashiva Brahmendra did not even break his
stride. He continued walking.
Seeing this, the soldiers were wonderstruck and terrified. They realized that this was no
ordinary man. The king and his soldiers ran after him, prostrated, begged his forgiveness,
and brought him back to the garden. He lived in that garden for the rest of his life, and finally
shed his body there.
There are innumerable instances like this in the yogic tradition. When your energies are in
a heightened condition, the sense of the physical is so diminished that it is even possible to go
without any external nourishment for days on end.
What exactly is the role of the chakras within the system?
There are seven fundamental chakras: the muladhara, which is located at the perineum, the
space between the anal outlet and the genital organ; swadhishthana, which is just above the
genital organ; manipuraka, which is three fourths of an inch below the navel; anahata, which
is below the point where the rib cage meets the diaphragm; vishuddhi, which is at the pit of the
throat; agna, which is between the eyebrows; and sahasrara, also known as the brahmarandra,
which is at the fontanel on top of the head (where newborn infants have a soft spot).
The chakras are the seven different dimensions through which your energies find
expression. Experiences that happen within you -- anger, misery, peace, joy, and ecstasy -- are

different levels of expression of your life energies. If your energies are dominant in
muladhara, then food and sleep will be the most dominant factors in your life. If your
energies are dominant in swadhishthana, pleasure will be most dominant in your life; this
means you enjoy your physical reality in many ways. If your energies are dominant in
manipuraka, you are a doer; you can accomplish many things in the world. If your energies
are dominant in anahata, you are a very creative person. If your energies are dominant in
vishuddhi, you will develop a powerful presence. If your energies are dominant in agna, then
you are intellectually realized. Intellectual realization can bring you to a certain state of peace
and stability within yourself, irrespective of what is happening outside of you.
These are just different levels of intensity. A pleasure-seeker has more intensity to his life
than someone whose life is just food and sleep. The man who wants to initiate something in
the world has much more intensity than a pleasure-seeker. An artist or a creative person lives
his life more intensely compared to these three people. If you move into vishuddhi, it is a
completely different dimension of intensity and agna is higher still. If you hit your sahasrara,
you will explode into unexplained ecstasies. Without any external stimulant or reason, you are
simply ecstatic because your energies have touched a certain peak.
It is misleading to speak of lower and higher chakras. It is like comparing the foundation of
the building to the roof. The roof is not superior; the foundation is not inferior. The quality,
life span, stability, and security of a building depend, to a large extent, more on the foundation
than on the roof. For example, in the physical body, your energies need to be in the muladhara
chakra to some extent. "Mula" means the root or source, and "adhara" means foundation. In
the engineering of the body, this is the base. If you wish to grow, you need to cultivate this.
At the same time, chakras have a spiritual dimension, not just a physical one. If you bring
the right amount of awareness to it, the same muladhara can be transformed to a point where
you become absolutely free of the compulsive need for food and sleep.
The chakras fall into one of two different dimensions: the muladhara, swadhishthana,
manipuraka, and related chakras are more concerned with keeping the body stable and rooted.
These are qualities associated with the earth, with self-preservation. When your energies are
dominant in these chakras, your qualities are earthy and you are more in the grip of nature.
The upper chakras -- the vishuddhi, agna, sahasrara, and related chakras -- are centers that
draw you away from the pull of the earth. They are concerned with the longing for the
infinite. They make you receptive to a force that we customarily refer to as grace.
The middle chakra, anahata, is a balance between the two. It is like a transition between your
lower and upper chakras, between survival instincts and the instinct toward liberation. It is
symbolized by two interlocking triangles, one pointing downward and another upward,
forming a six-pointed star. Many religious traditions have used the star as a sacred symbol,
because some enlightened beings in these cultures realized their original nature through the
anahata, and discovered the interlocking triangles of this chakra within themselves.
The vishuddhi chakra, located in the pit of your throat, literally means "filter." If your
vishuddhi becomes powerful, you have the ability to filter everything that enters you. Or in
other words, once your vishuddhi is very active, you grow so powerful that external nature

has no influence over you. Indian iconography depicts Adiyogi, or Shiva, with a blue throat,
because he is capable of filtering all the poisons of the outside world and preventing them
from entering his system by stalling them in his throat.
If your energies move into the agna chakra, located between your eyebrows, you are
intellectually enlightened, but still not experientially liberated. The great mystic philosopher
of eighth-century India Adi Shankara walked all across the land, defeating legions of scholars
in metaphysical debate. His logic was unbeatable, because the union experienced in agna
endows one with an extraordinary level of intellectual insight and perception.
The seventh chakra, sahasrara, is actually located just outside the body. For most people, it
is dormant. Through spiritual practice or a very intense way of living, you can activate this. If
you hit your sahasrara, your experience is no longer intellectual; it is experiential. You now
explode into unexplained ecstasies and the deepest mystical realms start opening up.
Sometimes you can attain ecstasies that can turn uncontrollable, if there is not sufficient
spiritual practice to create the necessary physiological and psychological balance. In the
Indian tradition, these ecstatic mystics were termed avadhutas. They were in such altered
states of consciousness that they often had to be fed and taken care of by those around them
because they were incapable of handling the worldly aspects of life on their own.
Fundamentally, any spiritual path can be described as the journey from the muladhara to the
sahasrara, an evolution from one dimension to another. There is a wide spectrum of spiritual
practices in the yogic system that enables one to move one's energies from one chakra to
another. However, from the agna to the sahasrara, there is no path. You have either to leap or
fall into it.
This is one of the reasons for the tremendous emphasis on the guru in the Indian spiritual
tradition. To make the leap from the agna to the sahasrara takes immense trust. Suppose you
were confronted by a bottomless abyss, and someone asked you to plunge into it, you would
either have to be utterly crazy, extraordinarily courageous, or absolutely trusting to do it.
Almost no one has the kind of courage it takes. Very few are mad enough to live their lives
with total abandon; most people live with caution and the overriding need to protect their
boundaries. So, for 99.9 percent of the people, what is needed is trust. Without trust, they will
never make the leap.
However, the abyss need not conjure dark images of a terrifying pit. Instead, it signifies a
space free of all possibility of hurt and suffering, an entirely new dimension that is flawlessly
non-repetitive, a dimension beyond comparison and context that leaves you not as an
individual but as all-encompassing infinite nature, in a stillness beyond bliss.
And so, the leap is worth it. The leap is everything. With the leap, the bottomless abyss
becomes boundless freedom.
Sadhana

By focusing at a point six to nine inches away from the region between your eyebrows for twelve to forty-
eight minutes, with your eyes open, you can realize the nature and structure of your individual chakras
(depending on the duration and your level of focus). This perception can help in stabilizing the random
movement of chakras in the human physiology due to stressful external situations. This is just one aspect of
a very sophisticated form of kriya yoga that allows you access to your inner akashic, or etheric,
dimension.

UNCHARTED PATH
The sixth limb of yoga is referred to as dhyana, or dhyan, which is essentially
about transcending the boundaries of one's physical and mental framework.
Dhyan traveled from India to China along with the Buddhist monks, where it
was referred to as Ch'an. This yoga traveled through the Southeast Asian
countries to Japan and became Zen, and found expression as a whole system of
direct insight without an emphasis on doctrine. Zen is a spiritual path that has
no scriptures, books, rules, or rigid practices; it is an uncharted path.
The first recorded use of the method we now call Zen happened almost
eight thousand years ago, well before the time of Gautama the Buddha. King
Janaka was a brilliant man and ardent seeker, burning with the longing to
know. He had exhausted all the spiritual teachers in the kingdom. None of them
could help him because they were all born out of the book. He had still to meet
someone who came from inner experience.
One day the king went on a hunting trip. Riding deep into the jungle, he
caught sight of a yogi. He stopped. Seated outside a small hermitage was
Ashtavakra, one of the most accomplished yogis and spiritual masters of all
time. Janaka prepared to get off the horse to greet him. He swung his leg over
the saddle and was about to dismount when Ashtavakra said, "Stop!"
So, Janaka stopped right there, one leg still in the stirrup and the other
midair. It was a painful position to be in, but Janaka stayed frozen, staring at
Ashtavakra. We don't know how long the guru held him that way, but suddenly
in that awkward state, Janaka became fully enlightened. The method employed
by Ashtavakra was akin to what is generally known in the world as Zen today.
Once it happened…There was a Zen master whom everyone respected, but
who had no teaching to impart. He always carried a huge sack on his
shoulders; this would contain many items, and some of it would be sweets. In
every town and village that he visited, children would gather around him, and
he would distribute sweets and leave. People asked for teachings, but he would
just laugh and go on his way.
One day, a man who was himself known to be a Zen master of great repute,
came to meet him. He wanted to ascertain whether this man with a sack was
really in Zen or not. So he asked him, "What is Zen?" Immediately, the man
dropped the sack and stood straight.
Then he asked, "What is the goal of Zen?" The man picked up the sack,

slung it over his shoulders, and walked away.
This is what yoga is also about. This is what every spiritual practice is
about. When you want to attain yoga or Zen, you have to drop your load,
discard everything on the way, remain free, stand upright. It is important. With
your load, you may never do it. And what is the goal of yoga? Consciously
take on the whole load once again. And now it no longer feels like a load!

Sacred Science
What does it mean to sanctify or consecrate a space?
The word "consecration" is often used somewhat loosely. For most people, it denotes a
series of rituals that offers, at best, beauty and poetry to our lives, but performs no real useful
function. Most believe it is mere mumbo jumbo meant to obfuscate the spiritual process and
exploit a fearful and gullible majority. It is time to discard this superficial understanding and
look deeper.
If you transform mud into food, we call this agriculture. If you make food into flesh and
bone, we call this digestion. If you make flesh into mud, we call this cremation. If you make
this flesh, or even a stone or empty space, into a higher possibility, this is consecration.
Consecration is a live process. The Sanskrit word for it is pratishtha. As we have discussed
earlier, modern science today tells us that everything is the same energy manifesting itself in a
million different ways. If that is so, what you call the divine, what you call a stone, what you
call a man or a woman, or a demon, are all the same energy functioning in different ways. If
you have the necessary technology, you can make the simple space around you into a divine
exuberance. You can just take a piece of rock and make it into a god or a goddess. This is the
phenomenon of consecration.
An enormous amount of knowledge about consecration has been perpetuated across
generations since ancient times, particularly in India. This is because regardless of how good
your life is, or how long you live, at some point the fundamental human longing to get in
touch with the source of creation will invariably assert itself. If the possibility to access these
deeper dimensions is not created and made available to every individual who seeks, then
society has failed to provide authentic well-being for its citizens.
It is because of this awareness that the Indian culture built numerous temples on every
street. The idea was not to create temples that were in competition with one another. The idea
was simply that no one should live in a space that is not consecrated.
It is tremendous good fortune for a human being to live in a consecrated space. When you
do, the very way you live becomes distinctly different. You may ask, "Can't I live without it?"
You can. If you know how to make your very body into a temple, going to the temple is not so
significant. Yes, you can consecrate your own body. But the question is, are you able to keep it
that way?
All spiritual initiations have been aimed at consecrating this very flesh into a temple-like
space. After that, all that is needed is maintenance. Doing a spiritual practice every day is one
way of trying to maintain the human system in a high state of vibrancy after an initiation. I
have given powerful consecrations to people at various times, sometimes formally,

sometimes informally. To consecrate an inanimate object -- a rock, for example -- costs an
enormous amount of life. Making human beings into living temples is much more
inexpensive and eco-friendly -- and besides, they are mobile! There are many advantages, but
the problem is human beings have to dedicate a certain amount of time, energy, and focus to
maintenance, otherwise it will not work.
When people in the world are too distracted and unwilling to make themselves into living
temples, building stone temples becomes a necessity. The basic purpose of building a temple
is to benefit the majority of people who have no spiritual practice in their lives. If one can do
some spiritual practice in such a consecrated space, it is doubly beneficial. Particularly for
those who do not know how to make their own body into a temple, the outer temple is
invaluable.
Consecration, or pratishtha, is done in various ways, but generally by using rituals,
mantras, sounds, forms, and various other ingredients. Constant maintenance is required. The
rituals in the temples are not for your sake; they are to keep the deity or energy form alive.
What is a deity? A deity is a tool for a specific purpose: to achieve fulfillment in different
aspects of life. In fact, the traditional word for deity is yantra, which literally translates as
machine or a working energy form. Traditional wisdom has always advised people against
keeping stone idols at home. If you keep them, you must maintain them every day with the
right kind of processes. If a deity is consecrated through mantras, and if the necessary
maintenance does not happen on a daily basis, the deity becomes a withdrawing energy and
can cause immense harm to people who live in the vicinity. Unfortunately, many temples have
become like this because of improper maintenance by people who do not know how to keep
them alive.
Prana pratishtha is different in that it uses your own life energies to consecrate something.
When you consecrate a form in this way, it does not need any maintenance. It is quite literally
forever. When I fulfilled my life mission, which was the consecration of the Dhyanalinga (a
subtle energy form with all chakras operating at their optimal capacity, at the Isha Yoga
Center in Coimbatore, in southern India, in 1999), it was through prana pratishtha. This is why
there are no rituals in this shrine. None are required. The Dhyanalinga does not need any
maintenance because its vibrancy will never fluctuate. Even if you take away the stone part of
the structure, it will remain the same. Irrespective of physical changes that may happen over
time, the energy form will not perish! This is because the real form is made of a non-physical
dimension. It is indestructible.
The Indian temples were never places of prayer. The tradition was that you had a shower
first thing in the morning and went directly to the temple, sat there for a while, and only then
began your day. The temple was like a public battery-charging space. Most people have
forgotten this nowadays. They just go to temples, ask for something, bum-bounce on the
temple floor, and then leave. This is quite pointless. The idea is to sit and imbibe the energies
of the place.
At the Dhyanalinga Yogic Temple in Coimbatore, you are not required to "believe" in
anything to reap its benefits. You are not required to pray, or make any ritual offering. You

are encouraged to just close your eyes and be in the space for some time. If you were to try it
for yourself, you would discover that it is a tremendous experience. The Dhyanalinga is in the
highest level of intensity that any form can be. Even if those who do not know anything about
meditation come and sit there, they become meditative by their own nature. That is the kind of
remarkable tool it is.
If I were given the necessary support and opportunity, I would like to consecrate the whole
planet! This is what I am good at: turning thin air into a very powerful vibrant space, turning a
piece of metal or stone into a divine reverberation. It is my dream that someday all of
humanity should live in a consecrated environment. Your home should be consecrated; your
street should be consecrated; your office should be consecrated. All the places where you
spend your time should be consecrated. When you live in such a space, your evolution need
not stick to the Darwinian scale; you can simply leapfrog ahead to a state of ultimate well-
being and freedom.
In India, most ancient temples were built for Shiva, or "that which is not." There are
thousands of Shiva temples in the country, and most of them do not have any idol as such.
They generally have a representative form, a linga.
The word "linga" means "the form." When creation began to happen, or when the
unmanifest became manifest, the first form that it assumed was that of an ellipsoid, or a three-
dimensional ellipse, which is what we call a linga. It started as an ellipsoid, and then took on
many other shapes and forms. If you go into deep states of meditativeness, you will find that
before a point of absolute dissolution, once again the energy takes on the form of a linga.
Modern cosmologists have identified that the core of every galaxy is always an ellipsoid.
So, generally in yoga, the linga is considered to be the perfect and fundamental form in
existence. It is the first form and the final form. In the space between, creation takes place.
What lies beyond is "that which is not" or shi-va. So, the linga form is actually an opening in
the fabric of creation. For physical creation, the front door is a linga and the back door is a
linga! This makes the temple an opening in the fabric of the physical. You could fall right
through it and go beyond: that is what makes it such a tremendous possibility.
Interestingly, lingas are found all over the world. In Africa, there are terra-cotta lingas,
largely used for occult purposes. In Delphi, Greece, there is a linga below the ground, known
as the "navel of the earth." This is purely a manipura linga, meant to promote prosperity and
material well-being. When someone showed me a picture of it, I immediately knew what type
of people had consecrated this. It was definitely done by Indian yogis thousands of years ago;
there is no doubt about that.
When I consecrated Adiyogi: The Abode of Yoga in Tennessee in the year 2015, it was an
event of considerable spiritual import -- in fact, a milestone for classical yoga in the Western
world. Having seen various ancient sites of interest, I am quite certain nothing of this kind of
energetic significance has happened in North America, or indeed in the western hemisphere in
the last three thousand years. Consecrated through the process of prana pratishtha, the space is
a tribute to Adiyogi, the world's first yogi. Exclusively dedicated to the pursuit and practice of
yoga, the space represents a living repository of the highest level of energetic vibrancy and

exuberance, and offers a unique spiritual possibility to seekers in the West.
Most of the lingas in India right now represent one chakra or two at the most. They are
invariably consecrated for material well-being. There are some anahata lingas consecrated to
promote peace and joy as well. The uniqueness of the Dhyanalinga is that it has all seven
chakras energized at their peak. To create seven separate lingas for seven chakras would have
been so much easier, but the impact would not have been the same. So, the Dhyanalinga is like
the energy body of the most evolved being, referred to in the yogic culture as "Shiva,"
eternally available to all. It is the highest possible manifestation.
If you push energy up to very high levels of intensity, it can hold form only until a certain
point. Beyond that, it becomes formless and people are largely incapable of experiencing it.
The Dhyanalinga has been consecrated in such a way that the energy has been crystallized at
the highest point beyond which there can be no form. It was created so that the intimacy of
sitting with a live guru is available to every seeker who longs for it.
Above all, what makes the Dhyanalinga an immense and unprecedented spiritual possibility
is the fact that it represents the opportunity to experience life in its complete depth and totality.
One who comes into its sphere is influenced on the level of the akashic, or etheric body, or
the vignanamayakosha. If you bring about a certain transformation through the physical,
mental, or energy body, it can be lost in the course of life. But once you are touched on the
level of the etheric body, it is forever. Even if you go through many lifetimes, this seed of
liberation will wait for the right opportunity to sprout and flower.
It took me three and a half years of a very intense process of consecration to complete the
Dhyanalinga. Many yogis and adepts have attempted to create such a linga, but for various
reasons, all the required ingredients never came together. This was not my will; it was my
guru's. Though my contact with my master was momentary, it has in every way been
momentous. It has directed every step of my life, including my very birth. The Dhyanalinga
has finally been accomplished, with his grace and with the love, support, and understanding of
many people, who gave of themselves, knowingly or unknowingly, willingly or unwillingly,
consciously or unconsciously. I am grateful to them all.
Sadhana
If you learn how to use the five elements in a certain simple geometric formation, you can create a highly
beneficial energy space for yourself. Here's a simple exercise you can try.
Draw a figure like the one below with rice flour or some kind of grain. Place a small ghee, or clarified
butter, lamp in a plate full of water at the center. Place a flower in the water. You have now created a
geometric form, using water, fire, and air. The flower in the water represents the earth. Akash, or ether, is,
of course, always present.
Try this simple process every evening. You will find the energy of your room altered in a subtle but
powerful way. In this manner, you can uniquely empower your home or office on a daily basis.

Mountains of Grace
For most yogis and mystics, the problem has been that they could never share the fruits of
their realization with people around them. To find another person capable of receiving what
you know is not easy. If you find even one person you are fortunate.
So, most spiritual masters downloaded their knowing in remote but not entirely
inaccessible places. They often chose mountain peaks because there is less human traffic and
disturbance in such places. There are many wonderful places like this in India. Mount Kailash
(the mountain peak in western Tibet that is regarded as a sacred place of immeasurable power
and antiquity) is the place where the maximum amount of knowledge has been stored for a
very long time in energy form.
Kailash is the greatest mystical library on the planet. Almost all the religions of the East
hold it as highly sacred. Among Hindus, it is traditionally regarded as the abode of the great
god Shiva and his consort, Parvati. The Buddhists hold it holy because three of their great
Buddhas are believed to be living there. The Jains believe that their first great master, or
tirthankara, attained liberation there. The Bon religion, which is the original religion of
Tibet, also considers it deeply sacred.
I have been taking pilgrims to Kailash for the past eleven years. When I went there in 2007,
my health was particularly bad. I had been traveling for weeks nonstop, during which baffled
medics in different parts of the world had diagnosed me with a variety of illnesses, including
malaria, dengue, typhoid, and even cancer. The confounded doctors termed my blood reports
"esoteric"! Finally, I decided to look inward and work on myself. A few days later, I went to
Kailash. I was better at this point, but still very weak. When I looked at the mountain, I saw
there was so much mystical knowledge waiting to be accessed. So I took a strand of energy
from the mountain and connected it to my energy system in a certain way. As soon as I did
that, there was a sudden resurgence of vitality, and my depleted energy body (ravaged by
nearly eight weeks of fever) bounced back to normal. I looked younger, felt younger, and
even my voice had changed -- just in about an hour's time! The results were visible. There
were almost two hundred people around me who witnessed this.
There are other places of enormous vibrational energy where mystics have bequeathed the
fruits of their spiritual practice. Such spaces are innumerable in the Himalayas. A variety of
mystics and yogis chose these mountains as their abode. When they lived there they naturally
left behind a certain dimension of energy, and as a result, the Himalayas gathered a kind of
aura.
For example, Kedarnath is just a small temple in the Himalayas. There is no deity there; it is
just an outcrop of a rock. But it is one of the most powerful places in the world! If you strive
to improve your receptivity and then visit a place like that, it will just blow you away. There

are many places like that in the East, but the Himalayas attract the most people.
There is another place called Kumara Parvat in the South Indian state of Karnataka. Parvat
means "mountain." Kumara refers to the son of Shiva, whose name was Kartikeya. He fought
many battles, trying to transform the world, but when he realized the futility of this, he came
to this region. It is here that he washed his sword of its blood for the last time. He decided that
even if he fought for a thousand years, he was never going to change the world; that one
violent solution would breed another ten problems. So he climbed up the mountain and stood
on the summit. Normally when a yogi wants to shed his body, he will either sit or lie down.
But because he was such a warrior, Kartikeya stood up and exited his body, standing.
If one can exit the physical form voluntarily without damaging it, that is an indication of
absolute mastery over the life process. This is generally referred to in the Indian tradition as
mahasamadhi, or "glorious equanimity."
When I went to Kumara Parvat many years ago, a small tent was set up for me. I wanted to
sleep in it, but when I went in and tried to lie down, my body would involuntarily move into a
standing posture, dismantling the tent. The whole night I was not able to sit; my body would
only stand. That is when I started seeing what Kartikeya's life was all about. Although he lived
thousands of years ago, what he left behind is still vibrantly alive.
This kind of work can never be wiped out. Wherever a person does something with his life
energies, he creates a certain possibility which cannot be erased by any event. The work and
presence of anybody who experimented even a little bit with the inner dimensions can never
be destroyed.
For example, Gautama the Buddha is supposed to have lived 2,500 years ago, and Jesus is
supposed to have lived 2,000 years ago, but as far as I am concerned, both are a living reality.
Once you create a certain volume of work with your life energies, it is permanent for all
practical purposes and time does not destroy it. If you work with the physical body of flesh
and blood, it has a limited life span. If you use your mind, the life span of that work is much
longer. But if you work with your fundamental life energies, then the result is timeless.

THE SILVER PEAKS
Ever since my infancy, there was always a certain mountain peak in the
background of my gaze. Only when I was sixteen years old and discussed this
with my friends (who responded, "You're crazy! Where are mountains?") did I
realize that nobody else had mountains in their eyes! For some time I thought I
should locate that peak, but then I put the idea aside.
Suppose there were a spot on your spectacles. You'd get used to it after a
while. It was just like that with my mountain peak. It was only much later when
a flood of memory returned to me, and when I was looking for a place to
establish the Dhyanalinga, that I began to search for the peak that had
dominated my vision.
I traveled everywhere. I made the 760-mile ride from Goa to Kanyakumari
on the southernmost tip of India about eleven times. Along every road and
mud track, I have probably ridden thousands of miles.
Then just by chance one day, many years later, I came upon a village outside
Coimbatore. As I was driving round a bend, I saw the Seventh Hill of the
Velliangiri Mountains. There it was: the mountain that I had seen since my
childhood. The moment I set my eyes upon that peak -- one that had lived
within me for my entire life -- it vanished from my inner vision and became a
living reality. Suddenly I knew this would be the most conducive space for my
life work.
If you ask me, "Which is the greatest mountain on the planet?" I will always
reply, "Velliangiri." I was born with an imprint of these mountains in my eyes
and they have haunted me ever since. They lived within me and have been my
very own navigating system, my inner radar. These mountains aren't just a
matter of geography for me. They are a reservoir of all that I needed to know
to create the Dhyanalinga.
The word "Velliangiri" literally means "silver mountain," and this range is
so named because these mountains are covered with cloud for a large part of
the year. They are also known as the "Kailash of the South" because Adiyogi,
or Shiva himself, spent a little over three months upon these mountain peaks.
When he came here, he was not in his usual blissful mood. (According to
legend, he was angry with himself because he had failed to keep his word to
one of his most ardent woman devotees.) He was intense and despondent, and
that energy is still evident today; it produced a string of yogis through the

tradition who were of the angry sort. They did their spiritual practice here and
acquired that quality. They were not angry about anything in particular; they
were simply in a certain state of intensity.
Above all, this mountain is very important for me because this is where my
guru left his body. This mountain is like a temple, a living shrine, for us in this
yogic tradition -- a torrent of divinity, a cascade of grace.

The Way of the Mystic
There is a great curiosity in certain circles about mystical experiences. Many claim to have
had extraordinary paranormal experiences which they cite as proof of their spiritual
evolution.
A common word in people's spiritual lexicons nowadays is samadhi, which is seen as a
certificate of mystical attainment.
What is samadhi?
It is a certain state of equanimity in which the intellect goes beyond its normal function of
discrimination. This, in turn, loosens one from one's physical body such that there is a space
between you and your body.
There are various types of samadhis, which for the sake of understanding, have been
classified into eight types. Among these eight there are two broad categories: savikalpa
(samadhis with attributes or qualities that are very pleasant, blissful, and ecstatic); and
nirvikalpa (samadhis that are beyond pleasant and unpleasant, without attributes or qualities).
In the case of nirvikalpa samadhi, there is only a single-pointed contact with the body. The rest
of the energy is loose and uninvolved with the physical. These states are maintained for
certain periods to help practitioners establish the distinction between themselves and their
bodies.
Samadhi is a significant step in one's spiritual evolution, but it is still not the ultimate.
Experiencing a certain type of samadhi does not mean you are released from the cycles of
existence. It is just a new level of experience. When you were a child, you experienced life in
a particular way. When you move into your adulthood, you have another level of experience.
You experience the same things in a totally different way at different points in your life.
Samadhis are just like this.
Some people may go into a certain level of samadhi and stay there for years because it is
enjoyable. In this condition, there is no space or time and no bodily problems because the
physical and psychological barriers have been broken to some extent. But this is only
temporary. The moment they come out of this state, all the bodily needs and mental habits
return once again.
Generally, compared to someone who is sober, someone who is slightly drunk has a
different level of experience and exuberance. But everyone still has to come down at some
point. All samadhis are a way of getting high without any external chemicals. If you go into
these states, a new dimension does open up for you. But the crucial thing is that it does not
leave you permanently transformed. You have not moved into another reality. Your level of
experience has deepened, but you have not become free, in an ultimate sense.

Most enlightened beings never stayed in samadhi states. Gautama Buddha never sat and
meditated for years on end after his enlightenment. Many of his disciples went into very long
meditations for years. But Gautama himself never did this because he must have seen it was
not necessary for him. He practiced and experienced all the eight kinds of samadhis before his
enlightenment, and he discarded them. He said, "This is not it." He knew this was not going to
take him to realization. Samadhi is just a heightened level of experience, a kind of inner LSD
without any external input, which causes altered levels of perception. The risk is that you
could get caught up with it, because it is far more beautiful than the current reality, but even
the most beautiful experiences, as we know, can become a drag with time.
If you have made realization the top priority in your life, then anything that does not take
you one step closer toward your ultimate freedom is meaningless. Let us say you are
climbing Mount Everest: you will not take one step sideways because every iota of energy is
needed to reach the peak. Now if you have to reach the peak of your consciousness, you need
every iota of energy you can muster. And still it is not enough! Now, you would not want to
perform any action that would distract you from the main purpose.
What is this self-realization? you might wonder. After all, all that most people are looking
for is health, well-being, wealth, love, and success. Do you really need self-realization?
Let us look at this in the simplest possible way. Isn't it true that the more you know about
your computer, the better you can use it? Isn't it true that your ability to use a device or
instrument is directly proportional to your knowledge about it? Isn't it true that someone with
a high level of dexterity and expertise can use even a simple instrument in a seemingly
magical way? Have you seen some people riding on a piece of plastic they call a surfboard,
doing incredible things? Just a piece of plastic, and what amazing feats of agility and grace
they can perform!
Similarly, the more profound your understanding of the human mechanism is, the more
magical your life will be. In every culture, there have been a few people who performed
certain actions that made others believe in miracles. All these actions that are known as
miracles are just born of a more profound access to life that some have enjoyed. That access,
as I have said time and again, is available to everyone who cares to look deeper.

Tantra: A Technology
for Transformation
Today, there are many practices associated with the occult sciences masquerading as spiritual
processes.
Let us say I am in India and you are in America. I want to send you a flower, but I am not
willing to take the journey that Columbus took. If I make this flower suddenly land in your
lap, this is occult. There is nothing spiritual about it; it is just another way of handling the
physical dimension of life.
In India, we have many sophisticated occult processes. There are people who can just look
at a photograph and make or break a person's life. They could ensure that the person contracts
some ailment that the body could not customarily have acquired in such a short span of time.
These occult practitioners can also create health, but unfortunately many of them use their
ability in other ways, as there seems to be a better market for these negative talents. In any
case, whether it is employed for ill health or good health is beside the point. The use of occult
toward any self-oriented goal is inadvisable.
The yogic tradition is filled with stories of the great yogi Gorakhnath. Some say he lived in
the eleventh century, but there are many accounts that date him much earlier. He was a disciple
of Matsyendranath, an illustrious yogi in his own right. Such was his level of attainment that
Matsyendranath was often venerated as a reincarnation of Shiva or Adiyogi. The lore tells us
that Matsyendranath lived for about six hundred years. This need not be accepted literally or
discarded as hagiography either. It essentially indicates an exceptionally long life span and the
tremendous awe with which this iconic figure was regarded.
Gorakhnath became his disciple, and he adored and worshipped his master. Gorakhnath was
all fire and intensity. Matsyendranath saw too much fire in him, and not enough restraint. Fire
burns through many things, so Gorakhnath started burning through the walls of ignorance,
and suddenly he had enormous power. Matsyendranath saw that he was running a little ahead
of himself, so he told him, "Go away for fourteen years. Don't stay near me. You are
imbibing too much from me."
This was the hardest thing for Gorakhnath to do. If Matsyendranath had said, "Give up your
life," he would have done it at once. "Go away" was something he could not bear. But since
that was what his beloved master demanded of him, he went away.
For fourteen years, he counted the days and hours, waiting for the moment when he could
return. The moment the period was over, he came rushing back. When he came, he found a
disciple guarding the cave where Matsyendranath lived. Gorakhnath said, "I want to see my
master!"
The yogi who was guarding the cave said, "I have no such instructions, so you had better

wait."
Gorakhnath flared up. He said, "I've waited for fourteen years, you fool! I don't know
when you came here. Maybe you came here the day before yesterday. How dare you stop me!"
He pushed him aside and went into the cave. Matsyendranath was not there. Gorakhnath
came back and shook the disciple and said, "Where is he? I want to see my master now!"
The disciple said, "I have no instructions to tell you where he is."
Gorakhnath could not contain himself. He used his occult powers, looked into the disciple's
mind, and identified where Matsyendranath was. He then started heading in that direction. His
guru was waiting for him halfway.
Matsyendranath said, "I sent you away for fourteen years, because you were beginning to
become occult-oriented. You were losing sight of the spiritual process and beginning to enjoy
the power that it gave you. When you come back, the first thing that you do is use occult to
open up your brother disciple's mind. Another fourteen years for you."
And so he sent him away again.
There are many stories about Gorakhnath making forays into this forbidden realm, and
Matsyendranath punishing him again and again. At the same time, Gorakhnath evolved finally
into the greatest disciple that Matsyendranath ever produced.
This is how the practice of occult in has always been treated in the yogic culture. It was
never treated with respect. It was seen as a way of misusing life, of encroaching into areas
where you should not. It was practiced only by certain types of people obsessed with power or
money.
At the same time, occult is not always a negative thing. It has earned this reputation through
misuse. Occult is essentially a technology. No science or technology is intrinsically negative.
If we start using technology to kill or torture people, then after some time we think, "Enough
of this damn technology!" That is what has happened to occult. Too many people misused it
for personal benefit. So, generally on the spiritual path, occult is shunned.
What is often referred to as occult is broadly what we know as tantra. In the current
understanding in society, tantra is about using very unorthodox or socially unacceptable
methods. But in its classical sense, tantra simply means "technology." It has nothing to do with
unbridled sexuality. It is important to make a clear distinction between the occult kind of tantra
and spiritual tantra. These two were divided as "left-hand tantra" and "right-hand tantra," and
are completely different in nature.
Left-hand tantra involves various rituals which may seem weirder than weird to many. The
left hand is very external; you need materials and elaborate arrangements to make it happen.
Occult practices, generally referred to as left-hand tantra, gave people powers to
communicate across distances, to appear in two different places at the same time, and use
energies to their own benefit and to the detriment of others. Right-hand tantra is more
internal; it is about enabling you to use your energies to make things happen. You use all the
simple aspects of life as a subjective science to turn inward and do something with yourself.
The left-hand tantra is a rudimentary technology and more available to the uninitiated, while

the right-hand tantra is highly refined and only available through powerful initiations.
Tantra is a certain capability; without it there is no spiritual process. If you have no tantra in
you, you have no technology to transform people; all you have are words. Words can be
inspirational and directional, but not transformative. A scholar cannot be labeled a guru.
Without a technology for transformation there is no master. So there is no guru without tantra.
Today there are too many people claiming to be gurus, but all they are doing is rehashing the
scriptures. A true guru's work is to overhaul the entire human mechanism from acquired
cyclical patterns of karma toward its ultimate possibility. It is like a mechanic's job, removing
karmic warts! If there is no tantra or technology in him, you cannot call that person a guru.

SERPENT POWER
The word kundalini literally means "energy." It refers to a certain type of
energy within every human being which is largely latent and unmanifest. The
kundalini has always been symbolized in the yogic tradition as a coiled cobra.
A coiled cobra knows stillness of a very high quality. When the snake is
motionless, it is so absolutely still that even if it is lying in your way, you will
miss it. Only when it moves do you see it. But these coils hold a hidden
volatile dynamism within themselves. So kundalini is referred to as a coiled
cobra because this tremendous energy exists within each and every human
being, but until it moves, you never realize it is there.
To live a full-fledged physical life, a minuscule amount of this physical
energy is adequate. Only when the need to transcend physicality happens do
you need a burst of energy which will launch you beyond this reality. It is like
the difference in the quantum of energy required in air travel and in a rocket
launch. Flying within the atmosphere is one thing and breaking the
atmospheric barrier for space travel is quite another. Similarly, transcending
physicality requires another dimension of energy altogether.
There is not a single Indian temple where there is no image of a snake. This
is not because this is a culture of serpent worshippers. It signifies that a sacred
space holds the possibility of arousing the unmanifest energies in you.
Snakes are known to be highly perceptive creatures. (Part of the reason for
this of course is that they are stone deaf and perceive only reverberation.) The
snake is particularly drawn to a person who is meditative. In the tradition, it is
always said that if a yogi is meditating in a place, there will be a snake
somewhere nearby. If your energies become still, the snake is naturally drawn
to you.
Though physically there is a world of a difference between a snake and a
human being, it is very close in terms of its energy system. If you encounter a
cobra in the wild, you might find it coming into your hands without any
resistance because its energies and yours are so akin to each other. Unless
your chemistry shows alarm which it interprets as danger, the snake has no
intention of giving up its venom, which is its wealth, the medicinal properties
of which are being increasingly acknowledged in the world today.
Historically, of course, the snake has received much bad press because of
the biblical story of Adam and Eve. But if you examine the tale closely, you'll

see it is the snake that initiated life on this planet. Otherwise there was just a
dumb couple who didn't know what to do with themselves. You and I wouldn't
have been here without that wonderful serpent!
Ultimately, the rising of the kundalini energy sets the basis for a much
larger perception of life. Traditional images of Adiyogi, or Shiva, depict a
snake with him to indicate that his perception is at its peak. Only if energy
rises to a certain level of intensity and volume can reality be perceived in its
utmost purity. Otherwise every other karmic imprint that we have (which goes
right back to the single-celled creature that we once were millennia ago) will
interfere with the way we perceive reality.

Joy is a rare visitor in most people's lives. The intention of this book has been to make it your
lifelong companion.
Joy is not some elusive spiritual goal. It is simply the background milieu that is needed for
any aspect of your life to unfold magically and wonderfully. If joy is not the ambience of
your life, even life's most pleasurable activities become burdensome. The issues of life
around you can be addressed to the best of your capabilities. But once joy is your constant
companion, you are no more an issue in your life. After that, life is a journey of endlessly
unfolding celebration and discovery.
For the first time in the history of humanity, we have the necessary resources, capability,
and technology to address every issue on the planet -- of nourishment, health, education, you
name it. We have tremendous tools of science and technology at our disposal -- powerful
enough to make or break the world several times over. However, if the ability to wield such
powerful instruments is not accompanied by a deep sense of compassion, inclusiveness,
balance, and maturity, we could be on the brink of a global disaster. Our relentless pursuit of
external well-being is already on the verge of annihilating the planet.
Never before has a generation of people known the comforts and conveniences we have
today. And yet, we cannot claim to be the most joyful or loving generation in history. A vast
number of people live in states of constant anxiety and depression. Some are suffering their
failure, but ironically, many are suffering the consequences of their success. Some are
suffering their limitations, but many are suffering their freedom.
What is missing is human consciousness. Everything else is in place, but the human being is
not in place. If human beings stopped obstructing the path to their own happiness, every other
solution is at hand. You cannot transform the world without transforming the individual.
My life's work has been dedicated to empowering human beings to take charge of their
own destinies and bringing them to a state of joyful inclusiveness so that the possibility that
we are does not pass us by as a generation. Your joy, your misery, your love, your agony,
your bliss, lie in your hands.
There is a way out. And the way out is in. It is only by turning inward that we can truly

create a world of love, light, and laughter. This book could be a doorway to that world
Let us make it happen.

Glossary
Adiyogi Literally, the first yogi. The being through whom the yogic sciences originated, also
known as Shiva.
Agna The center of knowledge and enlightenment, agna is one of the seven major energy
centers of the human body. Physically located between the eyebrows, it is also known as
the "third eye."
Ahankara The sense of identity within a person, one of the consequences of which is the ego.
Akash Ether. An intermediary situation between creation and the source of creation, akash
forms the subtle physical landscape on which the rest of creation unfolds.
Anahata A significant chakra, or energy center, in the human system, this is known as the
"heart chakra." It is symbolized by two triangles forming a six-pointed star, where the
upward-pointing triangle denotes the physical and the downward denotes the dimension
beyond the physical.
Anandamayakosha Lit. bliss body. One of the sheaths, or layers, that make up the human
being, according to yogic physiology. A non-physical dimension.
Ana pana sati yoga A complete system of yoga which involves bringing awareness to one's
breath.
Angamardana A series of thirty-one dynamic processes to invigorate the body and reach
peak physical fitness. Angamardana literally means to gain complete mastery over the
limbs, organs, and other parts of the body. It revitalizes all the systems of the body, such
as the muscular, skeletal, nervous, circulatory, and respiratory systems.
Annamayakosha The physical sheath, or layer, in yogic physiology, this is also referred to as
the food body, since the physical body is essentially constituted of the food that one
consumes.

Asana, Yogasana Yoga means union or to merge, while asana means a physical posture.
Those postures that allow one to achieve union with one's higher nature are referred to
as yogasanas. One of the eight limbs of yoga.
Avadhuta One who has risen above duality. Generally describes a yogi or saint who is in a
constant state of inner bliss.
Ayurveda, Ayurvedic Lit. the science of life. An ancient Indian system of food and medicine,
which employs herbs and earth elements to correct systemic irregularities, and promote
health and well-being.
Bhakti yoga Lit. yoga of devotion. Refers to the spiritual path of self-realization through love
and devotion. Characterized by an intense desire for union with the object of one's
devotion. One of the four paths of yoga.
Bhuta shuddhi The most fundamental practice in yoga, bhuta shuddhi means the cleansing of
the five elements within the human system.
Bhuta siddhi A state where one has gained mastery over the five elements within the human
system; a level of expertise that promotes well-being and the ability to access dimensions
beyond the physical.
Brahmarandra Brahma means the ultimate and randra means opening or cavity. Another
name for the sahasrara chakra, which is located at the fontanel, or the soft spot at the top
of an infant's head.
Buddhi Faculty of discrimination, analysis, logical and rational thought; the intellect.
Chakra Lit. wheel. Also refers to the junctions of nadis (channels) in the energy body.
Though seven major chakras are associated with the human body, there are a total of
114 chakras, two of which are outside the human body.
Chidakash, or Chidakasha The etheric dimension of intelligence.
Chitta Pure intelligence, unsullied by memory. The deepest, most fundamental dimension of
the human mind; a person in touch with this dimension is said to have access to the
source of creation.
Chit shakti Lit. the power of the mind. Also a meditation designed by Sadhguru to enhance
the power of the mind.

Dharana A yogic process in which the subject maintains an unwavering focus on an object
and establishes experiential contact with it. One of the eight limbs of yoga.
Dhyana, or Dhyan A yogic process of maintaining focus in which either the subject or object
is absorbed into the other. One of the eight limbs of yoga.
Dhyanalinga A powerful energy form at Isha Yoga Center in India, it was consecrated by
Sadhguru exclusively for the purpose of meditation.
Gnana, Gnana yoga Attainment of a state where one's intelligence is employed to reach
one's ultimate nature. One of the four paths of yoga.
Guru Lit. dispeller of darkness. A spiritual master, a realized being who guides spiritual
seekers toward liberation.
Hatha yoga A form of yoga involving physical postures and practices. Used as both a
purificatory and preparatory step for meditation and higher dimensions of spiritual
experience.
Ida One of the three major pranic channels in the human body. Located on the left side of the
body, it is feminine and intuitive in nature.
Kalpavriksha Lit. a wishing tree. In yoga, a well-established mind is referred to as a
kalpavriksha.
Karma Lit. action. Used to refer to the composite expression of past actions, which binds one
to the body and determines many aspects about a person.
Karma yoga Yoga of action. The science of performing actions that liberate rather than
entangle a human being. One of the four paths of yoga.
Kriya, Kriya yoga Lit. internal action. Transforming one's inner energies to reach one's
ultimate nature. One of the four paths of yoga.
Kundalini Fundamental life energy, which rises upward through the practice of yoga.
Depicted as a snake coiled at the base of the spine.
Linga Lit. the first or primordial form. A perfect ellipsoid, it is the fundamental form in the
cosmic geometry.
Mahasamadhi Highest form of equanimity that entails the complete dissolution or

neutralization of the personal in the universal, whereby all traits of individual nature are
transcended. Also known as Nirvana, and Mahaparinibbana in other Eastern spiritual
traditions.
Manas A dimension of the mind, distinct from the intellect, which is a complex amalgam of
memory, and molds thoughts and emotions.
Mandala Refers to the physiognomic cycle, a time period of forty to forty-eight days, which
is the natural period of many physiological processes in the body.
Manipuraka The chakra, or energy center, located a little below the navel. It is associated
with the vital energy needed for survival and active engagement in the outside world.
Manomayakosha The mental body. One of the five sheaths of the yogic physiology.
Muladhara Located at the perineum, the muladhara is the foundation of the energy body.
Nadi The channels through which the life force, or prana, flows in the energy body.
Namaskar The traditional Indian practice of putting two hands together, which harmonizes
the two dimensions (right-left, masculine-feminine, etc.) within a person, and promotes
an experience of unity and sovereignty within the self, while acknowledging the same in
others.
Nirvikalpa Lit. without qualities. A type of samadhi, or equanimity, beyond all qualities or
attributes, where a person's contact with their body is minimal.
Pingala One of the major energy channels of the body. Located on the right side of the body,
the pingala is considered masculine in nature.
Prana Fundamental life force; vital energy.
Pranamayakosha The energy body. One of the five sheaths of yogic physiology.
Pratishtha Process of consecration or energizing an object or space. These processes are
mainly of two kinds: mantra pratishtha, through chanting appropriate mantras and
performing rituals; and prana pratishtha, through a direct process involving the
consecrator's own prana-shakti, or life energies.
Sadhana Lit. tool or device. Spiritual practices which are used as a means to self-realization.

Sahasrara The chakra, or energy center, of the human system located at the fontanel or
crown of the head.
Samadhi Deep state of equanimity, one of the eight limbs of yoga. Greatly celebrated in the
Indian spiritual tradition, the experience of samadhi is therapeutic and deeply
transformative in nature.
Samsara The repetitive and cyclical nature of the physical world and the domain of karma,
which offers the necessary stability for the making of life.
Samyukti The state of having a well-established mind, which does not work against itself.
Savikalpa Lit. with qualities. Used to refer to types of samadhi, or equanimity, with qualities
or attributes.
Shavasana Lit. corpse posture. One of the eighty-four asanas in the classical yogic tradition.
Practiced for its capacity to promote restfulness and for its rejuvenating impact on the
system.
Shi-va, Shiva Lit. that which is not. Used to refer to limitless space; also refers to Adiyogi, the
first yogi, who experienced a state of union with this limitless space.
Sushumna The central channel in the energy body which conducts kundalini, or the life force.
Surya kriya A powerful process of activating the sun within. Surya means sun, and kriya
means an inner energy process. Designed as a holistic process for health, wellness, and
inner well-being, surya kriya is also a complete spiritual process.
Surya namaskar An ancient yogic practice, which is not only a way of balancing the system,
but also a way of becoming receptive to the sun, based on the logic that all life is solar-
powered.
Surya shakti A yogic practice which stimulates the sun within the human system.
Swadhishthana Lit. abode of the self; the chakra or energy center situated just above the
genitals.
Tamas Inertia. Refers to one of the three qualities of existence; the other two are rajas, or
dynamism, and sattva, or equanimity.
Tantra Lit. technology. The technology of spiritual transformation.

Vasanas Tendencies or inclinations; subliminal traits in a human being, the residue of desires
and actions.
Vedanta Lit. end of perceivable knowledge. The philosophy or the teachings of the
Upanishads, the speculative and metaphysical commentaries on the Vedas.
Vignanamayakosha One of the five layers of the body, which is known as a transitory body. It
facilitates the transition from the physical to the non-physical.
Vishesh Gnana Extraordinary knowing or knowing beyond sense perception.
Vishuddhi One of the seven major chakras, vishuddhi is the center of power and vision. It is
located at the pit of the throat.
Yantra Lit. form. An energy form, which can be designed and consecrated in different ways
to bring prosperity and well-being to one's life.
Yoga Lit. to yoke or unite. A state of being where the individual experiences a state of union
with existence. Also refers to the ancient spiritual science, which gives methods and
technologies to reach that state.
Yogi One who has known the union of existence. A person who is in a state of yoga.

INNER ENGINEERING ONLINE PROGRAM
Designed by Sadhguru, Inner Engineering Online is a seven-session course that empowers
you to create your life the way you want it. It offers the opportunity for inner exploration
using methods that are the distilled essence of the yogic sciences and imparts practical
wisdom to manage your body, mind, emotions, and the fundamental life energy within.
The Inner Engineering program is the next step for anyone wishing to explore the inner
dimension in greater depth. Visit www.InnerEngineering.com/BookNextStep to learn more
about special offers for readers of this book.
Inner Engineering is also offered as a four-day live event in various cities across North
America and at the Isha Institute of Inner-sciences in a residential format. Visit
www.InnerEngineering.com to learn more about the live events as well as dates and
locations.

ISHA FOUNDATION
Founded by Sadhguru in 1992, Isha Foundation is an international, volunteer-run, non-
religious, nonprofit, public service organization dedicated to addressing all aspects of
human well-being. It is headquartered in the United States at the Isha Institute of Inner-
sciences on the spectacular Cumberland Plateau in Central Tennessee and in southern India
at the Isha Yoga Center in the lush rain forest at the base of the Velliangiri Mountains, near
Coimbatore. Beyond their natural beauty, the powerful consecrated spaces in these
locations help lay the foundation for individual growth and offer enduring benefits in
various aspects of life.
Supported by over three million volunteers worldwide, the Foundation's activities range
from large-scale humanitarian projects in the fields of public health, ecology, and
education to yoga programs for the individual with the goal of inner transformation.
Action for Rural Rejuvenation provides free medical care and community rehabilitation
for more than seven million people in 4,600 villages in southern India. Project GreenHands
is a massive public reforestation effort that has planted over 28 million trees to date. It set
the Guinness World Record for having planted the most number of trees -- more than
850,000 in a single day -- and was also awarded India's highest environmental award. Isha
Vidhya aims to transform the lives of underprivileged rural children by providing
affordable, high-quality education to more than 70,000 children. The objective of all the
Foundation's activities is to empower the individual to realize the ultimate potential within,
and to promote a global climate of inclusiveness and harmony.
Visit isha.sadhguru.org to learn more.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
SADHGURU JAGGI VASUDEV is a yogi, a mystic, and the founder of Isha, an all-
volunteer organization engaged in large-scale humanitarian and environmental projects.
He has spoken at the World Economic Forum, the United Nations, Stanford University,
MIT, Harvard University, Wharton, and many other institutions.
Isha.Sadhguru.org
Facebook.com/Sadhguru
@Sadhgurujv

Penguin
Random
House
EB
CD
0
to,
RANDOM HOUSE
